CALGB 9581 

Activation Date: 05/31/97 
Includes Update #18 

CANCER AND LEUKEMIA GROUP B 

 

CALGB 9581 

ECOG C9581/SWOG C9581/NCCTG C9581 

EPP 9581/CRCTU C9581/NCIC CTG CO.14/EORTC 40991 

PHASE III RANDOMIZED STUDY OF ADJUVANT IMMUNOTHERAPY WITH 

MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY 17-1A VERSUS NO ADJUVANT THERAPY FOLLOWING RESECTION FOR 

STAGE II (MODIFIED ASTLER-COLLER B2) ADENOCARCINOMA OF THE COLON 

 

 
 

1.  PHASE III RANDOMIZED STUDY OF ADJUVANT IMMUNOTHERAPY WITH 

MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY 17-1A VERSUS NO ADJUVANT THERAPY FOLLOWING RESECTION 

FOR STAGE II (MODIFIED ASTLER-COLLER B2) ADENOCARCINOMA OF THE COLON 

 

Patient Eligibility (See Section 3.0) 
Pathologically documented Stage II pT3N0 or pT4bN0 (Modified Astler- 
Coller B2) colon adenocarcinoma (see Section 3.2.1 & Appendix III). 

Complete, en bloc resection of all of the primary tumor, performed as an 
open procedure and not laparoscopically or laparoscopically assisted. 

No evidence of perforation or clinical obstruction of the bowel. 
The gross distal margin of the primary tumor must lie above  

the peritoneal reflection (i.e., it must be a colon, not a rectal cancer). 

No previous radiation or chemotherapy for this malignancy. 
Age ‡  18 years. 
CALGB Performance Status 0-1. 
No concurrent treatment with systemic steroids is allowed (see Section 3.6). 
No prior exposure to murine antibodies (see Section 3.7). 
No uncontrolled or severe cardiovascular disease. 
No history of pancreatitis. 
Non-pregnant and non-lactating (see Section 3.10). 
No previous or concurrent malignancy (see Section 3.11). 

Required Initial Laboratory Values 

Granulocytes 
Platelet Cnt 
BUN 
Creatinine 
Bilirubin 
 
 
 
 
 

>1,800/µl 
>100,000/µl 
<1.5 x normal 
<1.5 x normal 
<1.5 x normal 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Patients  must  begin  treatment  no  earlier  than  7  days  and  no  later  than  42  days  post-
surgical resection. Patients must have adequately recovered from surgery (i.e., adequate 
oral intake, normal bowel pattern, no evidence of postoperative infection, and adequate 
wound healing) prior to initiation of treatment. 

SCHEMA 

Surgical Resection*
(See Appendix II)

&

Eligibility Assessment

R
A
N
D
O
M
I
Z
E

MoAb 17-1A
(500 mg IV initial course, subsequent courses 
100 mg IV q 28 days x 4)

Observation

 

*  Legible  copies  of  the  operative  note  and  pathology  report  must  be  submitted  to  the 
appropriate  data  management  center  for  routing  to  the  CALGB  Data  Management 
Center for review (See Section 4.3 and Appendix II). 

CALGB 9581 

 

Stratification 

  1. Histology - Degree of Differentiation 

1. Well 
2. Moderately Well 
3. Poor 

  2. Histology - Vascular or Lymphatic Invasion 

1. No 
2. Yes 

  3. Preoperative Serum CEA 

1. < 5.0 ng/ml 
2. ‡  5.0 ng/ml 
3. Unknown 

CALGB 9581 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SECTION ........................................................................................................................ PAGE 

1.0 

INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 1 

2.0  OBJECTIVES ................................................................................................................ 3 

3.0  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA ................................................................................................. 4 

4.0  RANDOMIZATION, STRATIFICATION, DATA SUBMISSION, AND SAMPLE 

PROCUREMENT & SUBMISSION .................................................................................. 5 

5.0  REQUIRED DATA ....................................................................................................... 19 

6.0  TREATMENT PLAN ..................................................................................................... 20 

7.0  TOXICITY MANAGEMENT AND DOSE MODIFICATIONS .............................................. 21 

8.0  DRUG FORMULATION, AVAILABILITY, AND PREPARATION ......................................... 22 

9.0  ANCILLARY THERAPY ................................................................................................. 23 

10.0  CRITERIA FOR RELAPSE ........................................................................................... 24 

11.0  REMOVAL OF PATIENTS FROM PROTOCOL THERAPY ............................................... 24 

12.0  ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING (AER) ......................................................................... 24 

13.0  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS ................................................................................ 31 

14.0  REFERENCES ............................................................................................................ 34 

15.0  MODEL CONSENT FORM ........................................................................................... 37 

APPENDIX I .............................................................................. CALGB Expanded Common Toxicity Criteria 

APPENDIX II ............................................................................................................ Surgical Strategy 

APPENDIX III .............................................. Pathology Practice Guidelines for CALGB Investigators 

APPENDIX IV ....................................Molecular Markers of Prognosis in Stage II (Modified Astler-

Coller B2) Colon Carcinoma 

APPENDIX V .................................................................................... CALGB Data Collection Package 

APPENDIX VI ............................................................................ Gender and Minority Target Accrual 

APPENDIX VII .......................................................................... Expanded Participation Project (EPP) 

APPPENDIX VIII ................................. Pathologic Prognostic Factors in Stage II Colon Carcinoma 
Registration, Data Submission, Pathology Submission, and Adverse Event Reporting for EPP 
participants are included in Appendix VII 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX  ……………………………………………………………… EORTC  Adminiatrative 

Appendix 

 

CALGB 9581 

1.0  INTRODUCTION 

1.1 

It is estimated that 100,000 new cases of colon cancer will be diagnosed in the United 
States in 1995 and that 47,500 Americans will die of this disease (1). While mortality 
from colon cancer has remained stable for men, a steady decline in the age-adjusted 
death  rates  in  women  has  been  reported.  The  cause  for  this  decline,  however,  is 
uncertain. For patients with colon cancer, prognosis is related to surgical stage: five-
year survival rates are greater than 90% if the tumor is restricted to the submucosa 
(Stage A); greater than 80% if it has penetrated into, but not through, the muscularis 
(Stage B1); 65%-80% if it has penetrated into or through the serosa (Stage B2); 35%-
60% if it has spread to regional lymph nodes (Stage C); and, finally, less than 10% if 
distant metastases have developed. 

1.2  Until  recently,  adjuvant  therapy  was  thought  to  be  ineffective  for  patients  who  had 
undergone  the  resection  of  Stages  B2  or  C  colon  cancer.  During  the  last  several 
years,  however,  several  prospectively  randomized  trials  have  indicated  a  significant 
decrease  in  the  probability  of  recurrence,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  prolonged 
survival-rate  when  5-fluorouracil  (5-FU)  combined  with  levamisole  has  been 
compared to non-treatment (2,3). Similar reports in smaller patient populations have 
been  published  when  5-FU  combined  with  leucovorin  has  been  compared  to  a  non-
treatment  control  group  (4,5).  Unfortunately,  this  adjuvant  treatment’s  beneficial 
effect has only been observed to date in patients with Stage C tumors. While a trend 
in favor of 5-FU and levamisole was observed for Stage B2 patients in the intergroup 
experience, the difference in probability of disease recurrence did not reach statistical 
significance.  This  perceived  lack  of  efficacy  of  adjuvant  treatment  in  patients  with 
Stage B2 disease may, perhaps, be a reflection of the small number of such patients 
studied.  As  surgical  results  in  Stage  B2  disease  have  become  quite  favorable,  and 
because large numbers of patients would be necessary to clearly detect a therapeutic 
advantage,  the  1990  consensus  meeting  held  at  the  National  Institutes  of  Health 
recommended  that  adjuvant  therapy  not  be  considered  standard  care  for  patients 
with Stage B2 colon cancer (6). 

1.3 

Immunotherapy  utilizing  BCG  (bacille  Calmette-Guérin)  and  autologous  tumor 
vaccines  have  proven  to  be  of  little  value  in  the  past  as  an  adjuvant  treatment  for 
patients with colon cancer. However, interest has recently been directed at the use of 
a  monoclonal  antibody  produced  from  a  murine  hybridoma,  MoAb  17-1A.  This 
monoclonal  antibody  is  a  murine  IgG2a  monoclonal  antibody  directed  against  a 
transmembrane  glycoprotein  which 
is  preferentially  expressed  on  many 
adenocarcinomas (7,8). The antibody mediates tumor suppression through antibody-
dependent,  cell-mediated,  and  complement-dependent  cellular  cytotoxicity.  These 
characteristics  allow  it  to  preferentially  target  and  lyse  cancer  cells.  It  has  been 
tested in vitro, in animal models, and in clinical trials (9-15). Treatment of nude mice 
with  human  colorectal  cancer  cell  xenografts  resulted  in  the  retardation  of  tumor 
growth  and  the  long-term  survival  of  a  proportion  of  the  animals  (16-17).  An  early 
pilot  study  of  the  use  of  MoAb  17-1A  in  Stage  D  colon  cancer  patients  suggested  a 
response  rate  of  30%  (11,18),  yet  a  subsequent  Phase  I/II  multi-institutional  trial 
found  an  objective  response  of  only  7%  (19).  In  addition,  it has been suggested  that 
the  idiotypic-antiidiotypic  interactions  may  play  an  important  role  in  the  cellular-
mediated immune mechanisms (20). In fact, one report using MoAb 17-1A suggested 
that  disease  progression  was  correlated  with  a  negative  antiidiotypic  response, 
whereas  stable  disease  was  noted  with  a  positive  antiidiotypic  response  (21).  When 
administered  to  humans,  the  antibody  localizes  primarily  in  metastatic  colorectal 
tumors.  These  early  human  trials  demonstrated  relatively  mild  toxicity,  including 
reversible anaphylaxis, fever, abdominal pain, nausea, and urticaria (18,19). Most of 
the  patients  developed  human  anti-mouse  antibodies  (HAMA),  although  this  did  not 

1 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

interfere  with  the  ability  to  administer  large  murine  MoAb  doses  or  to  use  multiple 
injection regimens. 

There have been reports that the presence of HAMA interferes with the measurement 
of  serum  carcinoembyronic  antigen  (CEA)  levels  by  enzyme  immunoassay  (22,  23). 
The  result  may  be  a  falsely  elevated  CEA  level  in  patients  with  elevated 
concentrations  of  HAMA.  Although  this  effect  is  corrected  by  the  addition  of 
polyclonal m IgG to the plasma before assay, recent information from Glaxo Wellcome 
reports that this interference is unlikely to occur with currently available commercial 
CEA  assays,  unless  the  serum  is  assayed  shortly  after  an  infusion  of  MoAb  17-1A. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  note  that  an  elevated  CEA  level  in  a  patient  with 
elevated  concentrations  of  HAMA  may  represent  a  falsely  positive  assay  rather  than 
recurrent disease. 

1.4  Recently, a German trial evaluated the efficacy of adjuvant treatment with MoAb 17-
1A in completely resected Stage C colorectal carcinoma patients (UICC stage III) (24). 
In this trial, 189 patients were randomized post-operatively to either observation only 
or  to  a  regimen  of  antibody  infusion  of  MoAb  17-1A  for  the  first  five  months  after 
surgery.  The  treatment  group  received  500  mg  of  17-1A,  14-21  days  after  surgery 
followed  by  four  monthly  infusions  of  100  mg  each.  Four  patients  (2.9%)  developed 
treatment-related  anaphylaxis,  which  was  controlled  with  outpatient  intravenous 
steroids. There were no treatment related deaths. Additional toxicities were mild, and 
infrequent, consisting mainly of constitutional and gastrointestinal symptoms. About 
80% of the patients treated with multiple infusions of 17-1A developed HAMA. In the 
treatment group a 30% reduction in death rate was reported; five year survival rates 
in  the  treatment  and  observation  groups  were  51%  and  36%,  respectively.  In 
addition,  the  trial  demonstrated  a  27%  reduction  in  recurrence  rates,  the  treatment 
and observation groups manifesting a  rate of  48% and 60%,  respectively. This effect 
was most pronounced in regards to the development of distant metastasis as the first 
manifestation  of  recurrence.  Using  the  Cox  proportional  hazards  analysis  while 
adjusting for prognostic variables, significant differences in survival (p=0.025), and in 
time-to-recurrence  (p=0.012)  were  detected  between  the  two  groups.  No  data  are 
currently available regarding the possible efficacy of this adjuvant treatment modality 
in  Stage  B2  colon  cancer  patients.  In  the  present  study  we  hope  to  determine 
whether adjuvant immunotherapy with infusion of MoAb 17-1A improves the overall, 
and  disease-free  survival  of  patients  with  Stage  B2  colon  cancer  compared  to  an 
observation  group  receiving  the  current  recommended  standard  of  care,  i.e.,  no 
adjuvant therapy after surgical resection. 

1.5  One  possible  cause  for  the  reported  lack  of  efficacy  of  adjuvant  treatments  in  Stage 
B2  colon  cancer  patients  is  the  inadequacy  of  pathologic  staging  parameters  to 
accurately determine those patients who would genuinely benefit from such therapy. 
The  identification  of  more  sensitive  and  specific  parameters  for  selecting  patients  to 
receive adjuvant treatment might well improve the outcome in this group. It has been 
shown  that  patients  whose  primary  tumors  have  17p  and  18q  deletions  are  more 
likely  to  develop  distant  metastases  (25-28).  In  addition,  overexpression  of  p53  has 
been proposed as another prognostic determinant in these patients (29-31). Formerly, 
fresh  frozen  tissue  was  necessary  to  determine  the  presence  of  these  chromosomal 
deletions  and/or  overexpression;  however,  current  methodology  utilizing  the 
polymerase chain reaction allows for their determination from paraffin-fixed blocks. It 
is  uncertain  whether  these  chromosomal  parameters  will  substantively  add  to  the 
prognostic  information  currently  derived  from  pathologic  stage,  tumor  grade,  and 
preoperative CEA levels. Finally, the presence of DNA aneuploidy has been correlated 
both with prognosis and response to therapy in colon adenocarcinomas and with 17p 
deletion  (28),  particularly  in  patients  with  Stage  B2  tumors.  Thus,  in  a  laboratory 
companion trial, we plan to determine whether the molecular 18q deletion and ploidy 
status  correlate  with  the  standard  parameters  of  histologic  grade  and  preoperative 

2 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

CEA  level,  and  whether  these  additional  characteristics  provide  a  more  sensitive 
measure of risk for developing recurrence in the treated and control groups. 

1.6  The  goal  of  the  laboratory  companion  to  this  study  is  to  better  understand  those 
factors  which  predict  outcome  in  Stage  B2  adenocarcinoma  of  the  colon.  The 
hypothesis is that the clinical behavior of a malignant neoplasm is determined by the 
genotypic  and  phenotypic  alterations  which  occur  during  neoplastic  transformation 
and  progression.  The  identification  of  such  alterations  associated  with  a  more 
aggressive  clinical  behavior  may  help  in  the  rational  design  and  application  of 
adjuvant therapies following potentially curative resection. Stage B2 colon carcinoma 
is  an  appropriate  setting  in  which  to  evaluate  this  hypothesis  since  the  risk  of 
recurrence  is  generally  low,  while  a  high  risk  subset  is  likely  to  exist  that  may  be 
identified by molecular markers. The aim of the laboratory companion is to define the 
utility  of  eight  potential  molecular  markers  of  prognosis  in  patients  participating  in 
the  treatment  and  control  groups  of  this  study.  The  data  will  be  used  to  create  a 
multivariate model to predict the risk of recurrence and survival in conjunction with 
standard clinical and histological features. 

The intention is to develop markers that may be suitable for use in clinical practice in 
conjunction  with  standard  TNM  staging.  We  will  thus  also  evaluate  clinical  features 
(age,  gender,  tumor  site,  serum  CEA  level)  and  histological  features  (depth  of  bowel 
wall  invasion,  vascular  or  lymphatic  invasion,  tumor  grade)  in  conjunction  with  the 
panel  of  eight  tissue-based  markers  in  a  multivariate  analysis  (For  further  details 
please see Appendix IV). 

2.0  OBJECTIVES 

2.1  To  determine  whether  adjuvant  treatment  with  MoAb  17-1A  will  improve  the 
probability of overall and disease-free survival, and increase disease-free intervals in 
patients who have undergone resection of a Stage II (pT3N0 or pT4bN0) colon cancer. 

2.2  To evaluate a panel of prognostic markers, in order to correlate these measures with 
survival  and  recurrence  after  adjuvant  therapy  in  patients  who  have  undergone 
resection  of  a  Stage  II  (pT3N0  or  pT4bN0)  colon  cancer.  In  particular,  the  specific 
aims of the companion study will be: 

2.2.1  To  determine  whether  alterations  in  the  expression  of  cell  cycle  related  genes 
(thymidylate  synthase,  p53,  and  the  cyclin-dependent  kinase  inhibitors  p21  and 
p27) predict the risk of survival and recurrence in this patient population. 

2.2.2  To determine whether alterations in markers of metastatic potential–expression of 
DCC  and  measures  of  tumor  angiogenesis  (microvascular  density  and  vascular 
endothelial  growth  factor  expression)–predict  the  risk  of  survival  and  recurrence 
in this patient population. 

2.2.3  To  determine  whether  a  marker  of  cellular  differentiation–sucrase  isomaltase–

predicts the risk of survival and recurrence in this patient population. 

2.2.4  To  determine  whether  DNA  ploidy  and  cell  proliferation  are  prognostic  of  tumor 

recurrence and overall survival in Stage II colon cancer. 

2.2.5  To  determine  whether  interactions  among  these  tumor  markers  identify  subsets 

of patients with significantly altered outcome. 

(Please  see  Appendix  IV  for  laboratory  companion  study  design,  methods,  and 
statistical considerations). 

2.3  To  determine  whether  pathologic  features  including  tumor  grade;  tumor  mitotic 
(proliferation)  index;  tumor  border  configuration;  host  lymphoid  response  to  tumor; 

3 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

and lymphatic vessel, venous vessel and perineural invasion predict outcome in this 
patient population. 

(Please  see  Appendix  VIII  for  pathology  companion  study  design,  methods,  and 
statistical considerations). 

3.0  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 

3.1 

Introduction 

This clinical trial can fulfill its objectives only if patients appropriate for the trial are 
enrolled. All relevant medical and other considerations should be taken into account 
when  deciding  whether  this  protocol  is  appropriate  for  a  particular  patient. 
Physicians  should  consider  the  risks  and  benefits  of  any  therapy  and therefore  only 
enroll patients for whom the agents administered are appropriate. Although they will 
not  be  considered  as  formal  eligibility  (exclusion)  criteria,  as  part  of  this  decision-
making  process  physicians  should  recognize  that  the  following  problems  may 
increase the risk to the patient entering this protocol: 

•  Other  serious  illnesses  which  would  limit  survival  to  <  2  years,  or  psychiatric 

condition which would prevent compliance with treatment. 

•  History  of  overt  coagulopathy  (prior cerebrovascular accident, transient ischemic 

attack or deep venous thrombosis). 

3.2  Required Tumor Parameters 

3.2.1  Pathologic  documentation  of  adenocarcinoma  of  the  colon  with  or  without 
penetration of the serosa with no lymph node metastases (Stage II pT3N0 or 
pT4bNO  lesions,  excluding  pT4aN0;  Modified  Astler-Coller  Stage  B2.  Please 
see  Appendix  III).  There  can  be  no  distant  metastases  or  penetration  of 
adjacent  organs  or  structures.  Proximal,  distal,  and  radial  margins  must  be 
free of tumor. 

Important  note:  A  tumor  nodule  >  3  mm  in  diameter  in  the  perirectal  or 
pericolonic  adipose  tissue  without  histologic  evidence  of  residual  node  in  the 
nodule  is  classified  as  regional/pericolonic  node  metastasis.  However,  a  tumor 
nodule  ≤ 3  mm  in  diameter  is  classified  in  the  T  category  as  discontinuous 
extension  (i.e.,  pT3).  Multiple  metastatic  foci  seen  microscopically  only  in  the 
periocolonic  fat  should  be  considered  as  metastasis  in  a  single  lymph  node  for 
classification. 

Although six or more nodes evaluated from the specimen is optimal, a minimum 
of  three  nodes  (periodic  or  mesenteric)  for  evaluation  is  required  for  inclusion  in 
the study. 

3.2.2  Complete,  en  bloc  resection  of  all  the  primary  tumor,  performed  as  an  open 

procedure, and not laparoscopically or laparoscopically assisted. 

3.2.3  No evidence of perforation or clinical obstruction of the bowel. 

3.2.4  The  gross  distal  margin  of  the  primary  tumor  must  lie  above  the  peritoneal 

reflection (i.e., it must be a colon, not a rectal cancer). 

3.3  No previous radiation or chemotherapy for this malignancy. 

 

4 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

3.4  Age ≥ 18 years. 

3.5  CALGB Performance status 0-1. 

3.6  No  concurrent  treatment  with  systemic  steroids  is  allowed.  Patients  receiving 
replacement  steroids  for  adrenal  insufficiency  are  eligible.  Patients  receiving  inhaled 
steroids  in  daily  doses  of  500m g  or  less  and  patients  being  treated  with  topical 
steroids are eligible. 

3.7  No  prior  exposure  to  murine  antibodies  (e.g.,  diagnostic  tests  like  the  “oncoscint 

scan”). 

3.8  No uncontrolled or severe cardiovascular disease. 

3.9  No history of pancreatitis. 

3.10  Non-pregnant and non-lactating. Patients of child-bearing potential should agree to 

use an effective method of birth control. 

3.11  No  previous  or  concurrent  malignancy  is  allowed,  except  inactive  non-melanoma 
skin  cancer,  in  situ  carcinoma  of  the  cervix,  or  other  cancer  if  the  patient  has been 
disease-free for ≥ 5 years. 

Patients  with  more  than  one  synchronous  primary  colon  tumor  are  eligible.  For  the 
purpose of this protocol, staging classification will be based on the stage of the more 
advanced primary tumor. 

3.12  Required Initial Laboratory Data: 

Granulocytes 
Platelet count 
BUN 
Creatinine 
Bilirubin 

>1,800/µl 
>100,000/µl 
<1.5 x normal 
<1.5 x normal 
<1.5 x normal 

4.0 

RANDOMIZATION, STRATIFICATION, DATA SUBMISSION, AND SAMPLE PROCUREMENT & 
SUBMISSION 

4.1  Randomization 

4.1.1  Randomization Requirements 

Informed  Consent:  The  patient  must  be  aware  of  the  neoplastic  nature  of 
his/her disease and willingly consent after being informed of the procedure to be 
followed,  the  experimental  nature  of  the  therapy,  alternatives,  potential benefits, 
side-effects, risks,  costs, and discomforts. Human protection committee approval 
of this protocol and a consent form is required. 

5 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

4.1.2  CALGB Randomization Procedures 

This  study  uses  the  CALGB  on-line  Patient  Registration  system.  Randomization 
will be accepted only through CALGB Main Member institutions, selected affiliate 
institutions,  and  CCOPs  using  the  on-line  Patient  Registration  system.  Patients 
must begin first treatment no earlier than 7 days and no later than 42 days post-
surgical resection. 

Confirm  eligibility  criteria  (Section  3.0).  Complete  the  Registration  Worksheet. 
Access the on-line Patient Registration system via the patient registration icon on 
the  CALGB  Information  Systems  (IS)  Application  main  menu.  If  the  registering 
CRA  requires  assistance,  he/she  may  consult  the  on-line  help  file  located  under 
the help menu of the CALGB IS Application. If further assistance is required, the 
registering  CRA  may  call  the  CALGB Registrar (919-286-4704, Monday-Friday, 9 
AM – 5 PM, Eastern Time). Enter the following information: 

Study 
Name of group (CALGB) 
Name of institution where patient is being treated 
Name of treating physician 
Name of treating physician or responsible CRA 
Other group patient ID #, if applicable 
CALGB patient ID #, if applicable 
Patient’s first name, middle initial, and last name  
Patient’s Social Security #, date of birth, and hospital ID # 
Patient’s gender 
Patient’s race 
Patient’s height, in centimeters (optional) 
Patient’s weight, in kilograms (optional) 
CTC performance status (if required by CDUS) 
Type of insurance (method of payment) 
Disease, type and stage, if applicable 
Patient’s Postal Code, if applicable 
Treatment start date 
Date of signed consent  
Patient demographics, if applicable 
Companion studies, if applicable 
Eligibility criteria met (no, yes) 
 

When the patient is registered, a patient identification number will be generated. 
Please  write  the  number  in  your  records.  Registration  to  any  mandatory  or 
optional  companion  studies  will  be  done  at  the  same  time  as  registration  to  the 
treatment  study.  Registration  to  both  treatment  and  companion  studies  will  not 
be  completed  if  eligibility  requirements  are  not  met  for  all  selected  trials 
(treatment and companions). 

After  registration  is  complete  the  patient  may  be  randomized.  The  patient  is 
randomized according to the stratification factors indicated below, which must be 
entered  to  obtain  a  treatment  assignment.  For  example,  if  age  is  a  stratification 
factor  the  actual  age  is  collected.  If  the  stratification  question  is  a  "no,  yes" 
question,  please  enter  the  value  “1”  for  no  and  “2”  for  yes.  Once  the 
randomization  is  complete  note  of  the  patient's  treatment  assignment  in  your 
records. 

The  Main  Member 
institution  will  receive  a 
Confirmation  of  Randomization.  Please  check  for  errors.  Submit  corrections  in 
writing  to  CALGB  Data  Management  Center,  First  Union  Plaza,  Suite  340,  2200 
West Main Street, Durham, NC 27705. 

Institution  and  registering 

6 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

4.1.3  ECOG Randomization Procedures 

A  signed  HHS  310  Form,  a  copy  of  the  institution’s  IRB-approved  informed 
consent  document,  and  written  justification  for  any  changes  made  to  the 
informed  consent  for  this  protocol  must  be  on  file  at  the  ECOG  Coordinating 
Center  before  an  ECOG  institution  may  enter  patients.  These  will  be  submitted 
to: ECOG Coordinating Center, Frontier Science, Attn.: IRB, 303 Boylston Street, 
Brookline,  MA  02146-7848.  Patients  must  not  start  protocol  treatment  prior  to 
randomization. 

ECOG  Institutions  will  call  the  ECOG  Coordinating  Center  (617-632-2022, 
Monday  -  Friday,  9  AM  -  4:30  PM,  Eastern  Time)  with  the  information  listed  in 
Section  4.1.2.  ECOG  members  should  not  call  CALGB  directly.  The 
randomization specialist will verify eligibility by asking questions from a checklist. 
In addition, the Randomization Desk will verify IRB approval. 

Upon  confirmation  of  eligibility,  the  ECOG  Coordinating  Center  will  contact  the 
CALGB Registrar to register the patient. The ECOG Data Management Office will 
then contact the registering institution with the treatment assignment. 

The CALGB Registrar will send a Confirmation of Registration to the ECOG Data 
Management  Center  for  routing  to  the  appropriate  institution.  Please  check  for 
errors. Submit corrections in writing to the ECOG Data Management Center. 

4.1.4  SWOG Randomization Procedures 

Investigators  will  call  the  Southwest  Oncology  Group  Statistical  Center  at  206-
667-4623  between  the  hours  of  6:30  AM  and  1:30  PM  Pacific  Time,  Monday 
through  Friday,  excluding  holidays.  The  SWOG  Statistical  Center  will  verify  that 
the  SWOG  institution  has  completed  the  CALGB  Randomization  Worksheet.  In 
addition, the SWOG Statistical Center will request the date informed consent was 
obtained and the date of IRB approval for each entry. 

The  SWOG  Statistical  Center  will  then  contact  the  CALGB  Registrar  to  register 
the  patient,  after  which  the  SWOG  Statistical  Center  will  contact  the  institution 
to  confirm  registration  and  relay  the  treatment  assignment  for  that  patient.  The 
CALGB  Registrar  will  forward  a  Confirmation  of  Registration    to  the  SWOG 
Statistical Center for routing to the appropriate institution. 

NOTE: Patients must also be registered to SWOG 9444 (see Section 4.4.3). 

4.1.5  NCCTG Randomization Procedures 

A  signed  310  form  must  be  on  file  for  this  study  at  the  NCCTG  Randomization 
Center before a NCCTG institution may enter a patient. 

To  register  a  patient,  call  507-284-4130  or  fax  507-284-0085  a  completed 
eligibility  checklist  to  the  Randomization  Center  between  8:00  AM  and  3:30  PM 
Central  Time,  Monday  through  Friday.  The  NCCTG  Randomization  Center  will 
obtain and confirm all eligibility criteria. 

The  NCCTG  Randomization  Center  will  then  contact  the  CALGB  Registrar  to 
register  the  patient.  Copies  of  the  CALGB  Confirmation  of  Registration  form  will 
be provided by the NCCTG Operations Office to the referring institution. 

4.1.6  CRCTU Randomisation Procedures 

The  following  documentation  must  be  on  file  at  the  CRCTU  prior  to  an 
institution’s  entering  a  patient  into  the  study:  signed  and  dated  –  c.v.  for  all 
investigators,  study  specific  commitment  statement,  FDA  Form  1572,  CRCTU 

7 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

Investigator  Agreement,  CRCTU  ICPA  Institution  Commitment  Statement  and  a 
copy of the LREC approval letter. 

To randomise a patient, complete the CALGB Randomization Worksheet and call 
or  fax  the  CRCTU  randomisation  service  (9  AM  –  5  PM,  Mon  –  Fri,  excluding 
holidays) on: 

0800 731 7625 (UK only) 
+44 (0)121 4147844 (outside UK) 

The patient will be randomised and you will be notified of the treatment allocation 
at  this  time.  The  CRCTU  will  then  contact  the  CALGB  Data  Management Center 
to  register  the  patient.  You  will  then  be  sent  a  confirmation  of  registration, 
including the patient registration number, within one working day. 

4.1.7  NCIC CTG Randomization Procedures 

The following documentation must be on file at the NCIC CTG central office prior 
to randomization: documentation of REB approval of the study and consent form 
and receipt of the investigator's brochure, copy of REB approved consent form (on 
institutional  letterhead),  REB  membership  (consistent  with  ICH  and  OPRR 
membership  requirements),  completed  NCIC  CTG  participant's  list,  a  current 
Cooperative  Project  Assurance  number,  laboratory  certification  and  lab  normals, 
a signed HPB 3005 form and current c.v. (updated within the past 2 years) for all 
participating  investigators,  and  an  FDA  Form  1572  for  the  principal  investigator 
only.  Please  note  that  documented  annual  approval  of  the  study  is  required  as 
long as patients are being followed on the study. 

Registrations will be accepted on Monday to Friday between 8:00 AM and 6:00 PM 
Eastern  Time.  The  eligibility  checklist  must  be  completed  prior  to  registration, 
The  registration  may  be  done  by  telephone  (613-533-6430)  or  by  fax  (613-533-
2941). As soon as eligibility is ascertained (including an REB approval date within 
1 year prior and the existence of a signed consent form) a call will be placed to the 
CALGB  Registrar  between  9:00  AM  and  5:00  PM  Eastern  Time.  NCIC  CTG  will 
then relay the treatment assignment to the centre and confirm it in writing. 

4.1.8  EORTC Randomization Procedures 

The randomization consists of three steps: 
•  First,  the  patient  will  be  registered  at  the  EORTC  Data  Center  by  the 
investigator,  An  EORTC  Sequence  Patient  ID  will  be  assigned  immediately 
upon registration through the EORTC Data Center.   
•  Secondly,  the  EORTC  Data  Center  will  connect  the  CALG  web  site  to 
randomize the patient on the basis of the information received at registration.  
•  Finally,  the  EORTC  Data  Center  will  provide  the  investigator  with  the 
patient's  treatment  allocation  and  the  CALGB  Sequence  Patient  ID,  by  fax 
(within one working day).  

Patient registration will only be accepted from authorized investigators. A patient 
can be registered after verification of eligibility directly on the EORTC Data Center 
computer,  24  hours  a  day,  7  days  a  week,  through  the  INTERNET  network. 
Alternatively,  registration  can  be  done  by  telephone  to  the  EORTC  Data  Center 
from 9.00 am to 5.00 p.m. Monday through Friday. This must be done before the 
start of the treatment. 

Tel:  +32 2 77416 00 

Internet: http://www.eortc.be/random 

An  exhaustive  list of questions to be answered during the registration procedure 
is included in the EORTC registration check-list, which is part of the case report 
forms.  This  EORTC  check-list  form  should  be  completed  by  the  responsible 

8 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

protocol number  

institution number  

caller's name  

patient's gender 

patient's height 

patient's weight  

patient's chart number (if available)  

patient's birth date (day/month/year)  

investigator  before  the  patient  is  registered.  At  the  time  of  registration  the 
following information should be readily available: 
• 
• 
• 
•  name of the responsible investigator  
• 
patient's initials (maximum 4 letters)  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
•  Zubrod performance status 
• 
• 
During  the  registration/randomization  procedure,  an  EORTC  and  a  CALGB 
sequence number will be allocated to the patient (patient sequential identification 
numbers). These numbers must be  recorded on the registration check-list, along 
with the date of registration and the date of randomization. The completed check-
list  must  be  signed  by  the  responsible  investigator  and  returned  to  the  EORTC 
Data Center with the initial data of the patient reported on the CALGB forms. The 
sequential  identification  numbers  attributed  to  the  patient  identify  the  patient 
and must be reported on all case report forms. 

eligibility  criteria  (all  eligibility  criteria  will  be  checked,  actual  values  of  the  eligibility 
parameters will be requested whenever applicable) 
stratification factors 

4.2  Stratification Factors 

4.2.1  Histology - Degree of differentiation 

1. Well 
2. Moderately well 
3. Poor 

4.2.2  Histology - Vascular or lymphatic invasion 

1. No 
2. Yes 

4.2.3  Preoperative Serum CEA 

1. < 5.0 ng/ml 
2. ‡  5.0 ng/ml 
3. Unknown 

9 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

4.3  Data Submission: Copies of the forms are distributed with the activated protocol. All 
forms  should  include  the  CALGB  patient  number,  as  well  as  the  patient  number  of 
the participating cooperative group. If you require additional copies of forms: 

CALGB Institutions: Main member institutions may contact the CALGB study Forms 
Administrator  at  919-286-0045  Extension  221.  Affiliate  institutions  should  contact 
the main member institutions. 

ECOG  Institutions:  The  original  data  forms  as  listed  in  this  section  should  be 
submitted  at  the  required  intervals  to  the  ECOG  Coordinating  Center.  Include  the 
CALGB  and  ECOG  study  number  and  patient  number.  The  ECOG  Coordinating 
Center  will  forward  the  forms  to  the  CALGB  Data  Management  Center.  In  addition, 
the CALGB Pathology Submission Form C-447 must be completed within one month 
of on study. 

Do  not  use  ECOG  Forms  for  this  study,  with  the  exception  of  the  Adverse  Drug 
Reaction  (ADR)  form (Form  #391RF), the ECOG Second Primary  Cancer Form (Form 
#630),  the  NCI/CTEP  Secondary  AML/MDS  Report  Form  and  the  ECOG  Pathology 
Material Submission Form (#638). 

SWOG  Institutions:  Two  copies  of  the  original  data  forms  as  listed  in  this  section 
should be submitted at the required intervals to the SWOG Statistical Center. Include 
the  CALGB  and  SWOG  study  numbers  and  patient  numbers.  The  SWOG  Statistical 
Center will forward the forms to the CALGB Data Management Center. 

NCCTG  Institutions:  The  original  data  forms  as  listed  in  this  section  should  be 
submitted  at  the  required  intervals  to  the  NCCTG  Operations  Office.  Include  the 
CALGB  and  NCCTG  study  number  and  patient  number.  The  NCCTG  Operations 
Office will forward the forms to the CALGB Data Management Center. In addition, the 
CALGB  Pathology  Submission  Form  C-447  must  be  completed  within  one  month  of 
on study. 

CRCTU  Institutions:  The  original  data  forms  as  listed  in  this  section  should  be 
submitted at the required intervals to the CRCTU. A copy of the forms should be kept 
in the patient notes or study file. The CRCTU will keep a copy of the forms on file and 
send  the  originals  to  the  CALGB  Data  Management  Center  once  the  data  has  been 
checked and any queries resolved. 

In  addition a copy of the Tissue Sample Tracking Form (C-447) and legible  copies of 
operative  notes  and  pathology  reports  must  be  submitted  within  one  month  of 
randomisation. 

NOTE:  CRCTU  institutions  should  not  complete  the  CALGB  Patient  Background 
Information Form (C-187, version 3). 

NCIC CTG Institutions: A single set of case report forms (CRFs) will be sent to each 
centre  (for  photocopying  and  use)  following  local  activation.  CRFs  should  be 
completed and submitted to the NCIC CTG central office according to the submission 
schedule.  In  addition  to  the  required  forms  as  listed,  a  copy  of  the  signed  consent 
form must be submitted for each patient. The CALGB and NCIC CTG patient number 
as well as patient initials must be recorded on each form. CRFs will be forwarded to 
CALGB by the NCIC CTG. 

EORTC Institutions: Data will be reported on the EORTC Eligibility Checklist and on 
the  CALGB  forms.  All  originals  and  the  material  listed  in  the  section  4.4.7  will  be 
sent  at  the  required  intervals  to  the  EORTC  Data  Center.  The  EORTC  Data  Center 
will forward the forms to the CALGB Data Management Center. 

10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

NOTE:  EORTC  institutions  should  not  complete  the  CALGB  Patient  Background 
Information Form (C-187, version 3). 

11 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

Please  submit  data  forms  to  the  appropriate  cooperative  group  office  listed  in Section  4.3.1 at 
the following intervals: 

Form 

 

Submission Schedule 

C-437  GI Adjuvant On-Study Form 
 
 

Pathology & Operative Reports** 
 

C-447  Tissue Sample Tracking Form - Blocks 

(Also  include  a  copy  of  the  pathology 
report) 

 

Within one week of registration. 
 
 
Send original with paraffin block to the 
cooperative group Pathology Coordinating 
Office and send a copy to the group data 
management office (SWOG institutions are to 
submit the copy to the SWOG Statistical 
Center***). Submit within 1 month of 
registration. 
 
Treatment Arm: Following cycles 1, 3, and 5. 

(See Sec. 4.3.3 for further instructions) 

   (See Sec. 4.3.3 for further instructions) 
 
 

 
 
 
Treatment Arm: Following cycles 1, 3, and 5 
then q 6 months for 1 year; at time 
of initial or additional disease recurrence 
or second malignancy; and at death. 
Observation Arm: Within 7 days after  
randomization, 3, 6, and 12 months post 
randomization; at time of initial or 

 
 
 
(See Sec. 4.3.3 for further instructions) 
All Radiologic Imaging Reports 
(Any time radiologic imaging is  
performed to document disease status)  additional disease recurrence or second 
 
 
 
Pathology & Operative Reports** 
 
 

 
C-272  CALGB Adverse Event Form 
 
 
 
C-438  GI Adjuvant Follow-up Form† 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C-300  CALGB: Off Treatment Notice‡ 
 
 
C-400  CALGB Long-Term Follow-up Form 

 
 

malignancy; and at death. 
 
After any biopsy and/or surgical pro- 
cedure post-randomization (including  
secondary malignancies). 
 
At end of all protocol treatment. 
Obs. Arm: Within 1 wk of randomization. 
 
Q  6  months  beginning  18  mos.  after  end  of 
treatment until death. 
Observation  Arm:  Q  6  months  beginning  18 
mos. post- randomization. 
 
 
At second malignancy. 
 
At death. 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
C-215  CALGB Secondary Malignancy Form 
 
C-113  CALGB Notification of Death Form 
 

 

 

**  Legible copies of institutional operative notes and pathology reports must be submitted to the CALGB 
Data Management Center with the other required CALGB forms. The operative report must contain 
a  detailed  description  of  the  operative  findings  with  specific  reference  to  the  extent  of  disease,  the 
presence or absence of metastasis, and whether any adjacent organs were adherent to and/or removed 
with the specimen. The original surgical procedure must be classified as ‘curative’ or ‘non-curative’ by 
the  operating  surgeon.  It  is  also  helpful  to  include  a  drawing  of  the  portion  of  the  colon  that  was 
removed along with the blood supply and lymphatic drainage. The surgeon will mark the location of the 
tumor and indicate the extent of the colonic and mesenteric resection. Please see Appendix II – Surgical 
Strategy. 

***  SWOG institutions see also Section 4.4.3. 
†  See Section 4.3.2 for codes. 

12 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

‡ 

If patient is randomized to the observation-only arm of this study, submit this form along with the other 
forms  required  within  1  week  of  registration,  and  use  code  “12”  and  “Obs.  Arm”  as  reason  for  ending 
treatment.  Patients  on  the  observation  arm  should  follow  the  same  post-treatment  data 
submission and clinical follow-up schedule as patients receiving protocol treatment. 

4.3.1  Data  Form  Submission:  Data  forms  should  be  submitted  to  the  following 

cooperative group offices according to the schedule outlined in Section 4.3. 

Group 

CALGB 
 
 
 

ECOG 
 
 
 
 

SWOG 
 
 
 

NCCTG 
 
 

Office Receiving Forms 

CALGB Statistical Center 
Hoch Plaza, Suite 802 
2424 Erwin Road 
Durham, NC 27705 

ECOG Coordinating Center 
Frontier Science 
Attn.: Data 
303 Boylston Street 
Brookline, MA 02146-7648 

SWOG Statistical Center 
1100 Fairview Avenue, MP-557 
P.O. Box 19024 
Seattle, WA 98109-1024 

NCCTG Operations Office 
200 First Street Southwest 
Rochester, MN 55905 

CRCTU 
 
 
 
 
 
For Institutions outside of the UK: 

GI Team, University of Birmingham Clinical Trials Unit 
Institute of Clinical Research, The Medical School 
FREEPOST, MID 18195 
Birmingham.  B15 2BR 
United Kingdom 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NCIC CTG: 
 
 
 
 
 
EORTC: 
 
 
 

GI Team 
CRC Institute for Cancer Studies 
The Medical School 
FREEPOST 
University of Birmingham 
Birmingham 
B15   2BR 
UK 

NCIC Clinical Trials Group 
82-84 Barrie Street 
Queen's University 
Kingston, Ontario 
Canada K7L 3N6 

EORTC GITCCG Data Management (40991) 
EORTC Data Center 
Av. Emmanuel Mounier, 83, bte 11 
B-1200 Brussels, Belgium 

4.3.2  Treatment Codes 

13 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

1.  Patient receiving MoAb 17-1A per protocol. 

5.  Patient on observation arm or in post-treatment follow-up. 

14 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

4.3.3  Submission Schedule for Follow-up and Adverse Event Forms 

For patients receiving MoAb 17-1A, Form C-438 and Form C-272 should cover the 
following  time  periods  during  protocol  treatment.  Note  the  one-day  overlap 
between time periods. 

a)  From day 1 of cycle 1 to day 1 of cycle 2. 

b)  From day 1 of cycle 2 to day 1 of cycle 4. 

c)  From day 1 of cycle 4 to day 1 of cycle 5  

4.4  Sample Procurement 

Blocks  will  be  carefully  banked  and  processed  for  this  study  according  to  routine 
CALGB  Pathology  Coordinating  Office  (PCO)  paraffin  tissue  bank  policy  procedures 
detailed below. The policy includes the following four components: 

a)  Safeguards  to  address  medical/legal  concerns  of  submitting 

institutions’ 

pathologists; 

b)  Quality control of storage and sectioning of blocks; 

c)  Quality assurance of stored/sectioned material; 

d)  Scientific review process for utilization of specimens. 

We respect and are sensitive to the medical/legal concerns of submitting institutions’ 
pathologists  and  have  developed  CALGB  pathology  policy  that  incorporates  the 
following criteria: 

1.  All precautions are taken to prevent exhausting the tissue block. 

2.  A minimum of three H & E sections (obtained at different thicknesses throughout 

the block) remain on file at the CALGB PCO. 

3.  A minimum of two unstained sections (4 micron thickness) remain on file at PCO. 

4.  Unused  portions  of  blocks  are  stored  at  the  CALGB  PCO,  unless  hospital  policy 

prohibits such storage. 

5.  Unused portions of blocks, H & E slides, and unstained slides are available to the 
submitting  institution  by  overnight  carrier  for  any  emergent  medical  or  legal 
need. 

The  CALGB  has  also  instituted  special  considerations  for  the  small  percent  (5%)  of 
hospitals  whose  policy  prohibits  long-term  storage  of  blocks,  and  the  smaller 
percentage  (4%)  of  hospitals  whose  policies  prohibit  release  of  any  block.  Specific 
questions  concerning  the  processing and storage of  blocks should be directed to  the 
Pathology Coordinating Office (614-688-3495). 

The treating institutional pathologist should screen and select the appropriate blocks 
for submission. 

Slides  will  be  prepared  and/or  routed  from  the  CALGB  PCO  to  the  laboratory 
companion investigators. Please see Appendix IV for details. 

15 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

4.4.1 

CALGB Institutions 

The following are required to be submitted to: 

CALGB Central Pathology Office 
The Ohio State University 
B054 Graves Hall 
333 West 10th Ave. 
Columbus, OH 43210-1239 
Tel: 614-688-3495  Fax: 614-292-5618 

1.  At 

least  one 

(three 

if  possible)  paraffin  embedded  block(s)  with 

REPRESENTATIVE TUMOR properly identifying: 

a.  Patient’s name and institution 
b.  CALGB patient number 
c.  CALGB study number 

2.  One  paraffin  embedded  block  with  NORMAL  COLONIC  MUCOSA  OR 

UNINVOLVED LYMPH NODE properly identifying: 

a.  Patient’s name and institution 
b.  CALGB patient number 
c.  CALGB study number 

3.  Original completed CALGB Form C-447 

4.  A  copy  of  the  responsible  pathologist’s  pathology  report  from  the  TREATING 

institution, and, if applicable, the REFERRING institution. 

5.  A copy of the operative report. 

4.4.2  ECOG Institutions 

Parrafin  blocks  of  the  tumor  tissue  will  be  required  for  tissue  banking.  Please 
contact  the  ECOG  Pathology  Coordinating  Office  for  slide  requirements  if 
institutional  policy  prohibits  release  of  blocks.  The  blocks,  along  with  the 
completed  ECOG  Pathology  Material  Submission  Form  No.  638-Part  B  and 
CALGB Pathology Submission Form C-447 and the institutional pathology report 
should  be  submitted  within  one  month  of  study  entry.  If  insufficient  tissue  is 
available  following  diagnostic  pathology  to  provide  the  paraffin  block,  a  letter 
stating  this  must  be  sent  to  the  ECOG  Coordinating  Office,  Evanston  Hospital-
Room  B624,  2650  Ridge  Avenue,  Evanston,  IL  60201-1797.  Include  both  the 
ECOG  and  CALGB  protocol  number  and  patient  number.  A  copy  of  the 
submission form will be sent to the ECOG Coordinating Center by the Pathology 
Coordinating  Office.  The  submitting  pathologist  should  be  informed  that  the 
blocks for this protocol will be banked for future laboratory studies, and therefore 
will not be returned to the submitting institution unless requested. 

4.4.3  SWOG Institutions 

Specimen  Submission:  Paraffin  blocks  of  tumor  tissue  will  be  required  from 
participating  Southwest  Oncology  Group  institutions  for  tissue  banking,  per 
instructions in SWOG-9444. (After the patient is registered to C9581, he/she 
must  also  be  registered  to  SWOG-9444.)  Procedures  and  sample  submission 
requirements  (as  outlined  in  Section  4.0,  SWOG-9444)  should  be  followed  and 
blocks  must  be  submitted  to  the  Southwest  Oncology  Group  Gastrointestinal 
Tumor Bank within one month of entry onto this study. (NOTE: Unstained slides 
will  be  forwarded  from  the  Southwest  Oncology  Group  Gastrointestinal 
Tumor Bank to CALGB.) 

16 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

The  Southwest  Oncology  Group  Gastrointestinal  Tumor  Bank  policies  protect 
patient’s  rights  by  maintaining  and  distributing  the  materials  for  research 
purposes  in  an  anonymous  fashion.  Investigators  never  know  the  identity  of  the 
patients. Precautions are taken to prevent exhausting the tissue blocks. 

Retrieval  Of  Blocks  By  Originating  Institution:  The  submitting  pathologist 
should  be  informed  that  the  blocks  for  this  protocol  will  be  banked  for  future 
laboratory  studies,  and  therefore  will  not  be  returned  to  the  submitting 
institution unless a written request is received. 

4.4.4  NCCTG Institutions 

NCCTG  members  will  forward  their  blocks  to  the  NCCTG  bank  at  the  Research 
Base. The NCCTG Operations Office Pathology Coordinator will forward a portion 
of  the  blocks  to  the  CALGB.  The  residual  tissue  will  be  retained  at  the  NCCTG 
Research  Base  but  will  be  accessible  by  NCCTG  members  upon  request.  The 
appropriate  NCCTG  institutional  pathologist  will  be  notified  if  a  block  has  been 
depleted. 

4.4.5  CRCTU Institutions 

The  blocks  required  by  the  CALGB  (see  section  4.4.1)  should  be  submitted  with 
the  corresponding  original  Tissue  Sample  Tracking  Form  (C-447)  and  copies  of 
the operative notes and pathology reports to:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

GI Team 
University of Birmingham Clinical Trials Unit 
Institute of Clinical Research 
The Medical School 
FREEPOST 
Mid 18195 
Birmingham 
B15   2BR 

Institutions  outside  of  the  UK  should  use  the  following  address  for  pathology 
sample submission: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GI Team 
Clinical Trials Unit 
CRC Institute for Cancer Studies 
Clinical Research Block 
The Medical School 
Edgbaston 
Birmingham 
B15   2TT 
UK 

 

The  blocks  will  be  stored  and  sent  in  batches  to  the  CALGB  Pathology 
Coordinating Office for tissue banking. 

4.4.6  NCIC CTG Institutions 

Following  randomization,  the  Queen's  University  Pathology  Department  will 
request  submission  of  blocks  as  described  in  section  4.4.1.  The  blocks  are  to  be 
clearly marked with the patient's initials  and  NCIC CTG and CALGB patient and 
study  numbers.  DO  NOT  INCLUDE  PATIENT  NAMES  ON  THE  BLOCKS.  The 
blocks  should  be  sent  with  a  completed  CALGB  Form  C-447  and  pathology  and 
operative  reports  to  the  Queen's  University  Pathology  Department.  These  will  be 
forwarded to CALBG--do not submit blocks directly to CALGB. 

17 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

4.4.7  EORTC Institutions  

The  blocks  required  by  the  CALGB  (see  section  4.4.1)  with  the  corresponding 
original  Tissue  Sample  Tracking  Form  (C-447)  and  copies  of  the  operative  notes 
and pathology reports should all be submitted to: 

EORTC GITCCG Data Management (40991) 
EORTC Data Center 
Av. Emmanuel Mounier, 83, bte 11 
B-1200 Brussels, Belgium 

The  EORTC  Data  Center  will  forward  the  samples  to  CALGB  Pathology 
Coordinating  Office.  Note:  The  local  pathologist  should  be  informed  that  the 
blocks for this protocol will be banked for future laboratory studies and therefore 
will  not  be  returned  to  the  submitting  institution  unless  requested.  However, 
none  of  these  future  laboratory  studies  (except  those  included  as  of  March  15, 
2000  [Update  14]),  may  include  EORTC  material  without  the  prior  written 
approval of the EORTC Data Center and the EORTC study coordinators. 

4.5  Pathologic and Histologic Studies 

In  order  to  meet  the  histopathological  objectives  of  this  protocol,  submitting 
institutional  pathologists  are  expected  to  specify  in  their  pathology  reports  which  of 
the following histologic factors is present in the patient’s tumor: 

•  Extracellular mucin (>50% of tumor mass) 

•  Small blood/lymphatic vessel invasion 

•  Extramural invasion 

•  Perineural invasion 

• 

Infiltrating (non-pushing) tumor border 

•  Peri-tumoral host lymphoid response 

18 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

5.0  REQUIRED DATA 

Surgery  MUST  be  completed  no  more  than  42  days  prior  to  randomization.  The  first 
treatment  must  begin  no  earlier  than  7  days  and  no  later  than  42  days  post-surgical 
resection.  Unless  excepted  in  the  table  below,  pre-therapy  tests  must  be  completed  as 
follows: 

Guidelines For Pre-Study Testing 

To be completed within 30 DAYS of randomization and must be a postoperative value: 

•  All blood work 

To be completed within 3 months of randomization: 

•  Chest X-ray 

 

 
 

Tests & Observations 

History and Progress Notes 
Physical Examination 
Pulse, Blood Pressure 
Height/Weight 
Performance Status 
Toxicity Assessment£ 

Laboratory Studies*** 

CBC, Differential, Platelets 
Serum Creatinine, BUN 
AST, Alk.Phos., Bilirubin 
Glucose 
Serum CEA† 

Staging 

Chest x-ray, PA & Lateral 
Histologic Review§ 

 
*   Each cycle is 28 days. 

Treatment & Obs 

Treatment 

Observation 

Treatment & Obs 

 

Prior to 
Study 

Within 2 days 
#
prior to Day 1  Random.,
 at 3 mos & 
of each cycle*  6 mos post-Random. 

Within 7 days of  

 
 

Follow-up** 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 

 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

 

X 
X 
 

X 
X 
X 
B 
X 
X 

 

X 
X 
X 
X 
 

 

 
 
 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

 

X 
X 
X 
X 
 

 

 
 
 

 
A 
 
 
 
A 

 

A 
A 
A 
A 

  A‡ 

 

C 
 
 

**  Treatment group: Follow-up begins after last cycle of MoAb 17-1A. Observation group: Follow-up begins 

12 months post-Randomization. 

***  Lab tests completed within 14 days prior to Day 1 of Cycle 1 need not be repeated. 
#  These data may be obtained within 7 days prior to or 7 days following randomization. 
A  Every 6 months for 5 years. 

B  Height need not be repeated prior to each cycle. 

C  Annually for 5 years. 

£  Refer to CALGB Form C-272. 

†  Preoperative serum CEA value will be  requested at time of registration, however if CEA is  not performed, 

the patient will still be eligible. See Section 4.2.3. 

‡  There  have  been  reports  that  the  presence  of  HAMA  interferes  with  the  measurement  of  serum 
carcinoembyronic antigen (CEA) levels by enzyme immunoassay. The result may be a falsely elevated CEA 
level  in  patients  with  elevated  concentrations  of  HAMA.  Recent  information  from  Glaxo  Wellcome  reports 
that  this  interference  is  unlikely  to  occur  with  currently  available  commercial  CEA  assays,  unless  the 
serum  is  assayed  shortly  after  an  infusion  of  MoAb  17-1A.  Nonetheless,  it  is  important  to  note  that  an 
elevated  CEA  level  in  a  patient  with  elevated  concentrations  of  HAMA  may  represent  a  falsely  positive 
assay  rather  than  recurrent  disease.  Please  note:  A  rise  in  the  serum  CEA  alone  will  not  constitute 
evidence of recurrence, but should prompt reevaluation. 

19 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

§  At registering institution. 

6.0  TREATMENT PLAN 

6.1  Therapy  with  monoclonal  antibody  17-1A  must  not  commence  earlier  than  7 
days  post  surgery  and  no  later  than  42  days  post  surgery.  Patients  must  have 
adequately  recovered  from  surgery  (i.e.,  adequate  oral  intake,  normal  bowel 
pattern,  no  evidence  of  postoperative  infection,  and  adequate  wound  healing) 
prior  to  initiation  of  treatment.  The  first  infusion  will  be  designated  as  “week  1.” 
Patients will receive 17-1A by intravenous infusion at an initial loading dose, followed 
by  a  lower  dose  every  28  days  (defined  as  one  cycle)  for  four  cycles  (a  total  of 
approximately 20 weeks), according to the following dosing schedule: 

Infusion Cycle 

Study Week 

Dose 17-1A 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

 1 

 5 

 9 

13 

17 

500 mg 

100 mg 

100 mg 

100 mg 

100 mg 

6.2  All  patients  must  be  observed  by  appropriately  qualified  personnel  for  at  least  one 
hour  after  each  antibody  infusion.  A  physician  who  is  familiar  with  this  protocol 
must be available during this time period. It is suggested that vital signs (T, P, R, BP) 
are  checked  before,  at  least  once  during,  and  after  each  infusion.  A  medical  cart 
containing  epinephrine  and  antihistamines  should  be  available  near  the  patient  for 
immediate  use.  Anaphylactic  reactions  have  occurred  during  repeated  17-1A 
infusions when previous infusions had been well-tolerated, and occasionally on initial 
exposure. 

6.3  Cycle 1 - Infusion of 500 mg 17-1A 

Fifty  (50)  ml  (5  x  10  ml)  containing  500  mg  of  17-1A  is  diluted  in  250  ml  of  0.9% 
sodium chloride in a glass bottle and infused over a period of 2 hours. The date and 
time  of  administration  are  recorded  in  the  patient’s  medical  record.  Treatment  does 
not  require  that  the  patient  be  hospitalized.  The  infusion  rate  should  not  be 
increased  as  patients  may  be  more  likely  to  experience  adverse  reactions.  The 
length  of  the  infusion  period  will  be  fixed  unless  an  adverse  experience  is  observed 
(see Section 7.0). 

6.4  Subsequent Cycles (Cycles 2-5) - Infusion of 100 mg 17-1A 

Ten  (10)  ml  (1  x  10  ml)  containing  100  mg  of  17-1A  is  diluted  in  250  ml  of  0.9% 
sodium chloride in a glass bottle and infused over a period of 2 hours. The date and 
time  of  administration  are  recorded  in  the  patient’s  medical  record.  Treatment  does 
not  require  that  the  patient  be  hospitalized.  The  infusion  rate  should  not  be 
increased  as  patients  may  be  more  likely  to  experience  adverse  reactions.  The 
length  of  the  infusion  period  will  be  fixed  unless  an  adverse  experience  is  observed 
(see Section 7.0). 

20 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

7.0  TOXICITY MANAGEMENT AND DOSE MODIFICATIONS 

If  the  following  signs  and  symptoms  are  medically  manageable,  they  are  not  to be a 
consideration with respect to a patient’s continuation in the study: nausea/vomiting, 
diarrhea, hemoglobin changes, or drug-related fever. 

7.1  Gastrointestinal Toxicity: The routine use of all antiemetics except dexamethasone 

in this protocol is permitted if clinically indicated. 

7.2  A  variety  of  hypersensitivity  reactions  may  be  observed  with  MoAb  17-1A,  including 

fevers, rigors, flushes and sweating. 

7.2.1  In  the  event  of  a  CALGB  grade  1  or  2  hypersensitivity  type  of  reaction  or 
acute  or  severe  abdominal  pain  or  diarrhea  that  occurs  during  or 
immediately  following  an  infusion  of  MoAb  17-1A,  at  the  discretion  of  the 
investigator and wish of the patient, any of the following actions may be taken: 

1.  Continue the infusion without change; 

2.  Continue the infusion at a slower rate; 

3.  Temporarily stop the infusion and start again at the original or a reduced rate 

at the discretion of the investigator; 

4.  Stop  the  current  infusion  permanently  and  rechallenge  with  MoAb  17-1A 

infusion at the next time-point specified in the protocol. 

Subsequent  infusions  may  be  given  at  a  reduced  rate  or  patients  may  be  given 
Tylenol or Benadryl

 premedication. 

Patients  who  are  rechallenged  with  MoAb  17-1A  after  experiencing 
hypersensitivity  reactions  should  be  monitored  closely.  The  following 
precautions should be taken: 

1.  A running I.V. in place. 

2.  Aqueous epinephrine 1:10,000 (10 cc) at the bedside. 

3.  A physician must be in attendance because anaphylaxis may occur. 

7.2.2  In  the  event  of  a  CALGB  grade  3  or  4  adverse  experience  during  or 
immediately  following  an  infusion  of  MoAb  17-1A,  the  infusion  should  be 
stopped and no further treatment with MoAb 17-1A should be given (see Section 
11.2). 

7.2.3  If  adverse  experiences  related  to  MoAb  17-1A  infusion  occur  at  some  point 
between  infusions,  future  infusions  may  be  given  at  a  reduced  infusion  rate  at 
the  discretion  of  the  investigator.  If  CALGB  grade  3  or  4  adverse  experiences 
related  to  MoAb  17-1A  occur,  further  treatment  with  the  drug  should  be 
discontinued (see Section 11.2). 

21 

11/15/04 
 

(cid:210)
CALGB 9581 

8.0  DRUG FORMULATION, AVAILABILITY, AND PREPARATION 

Additional information for CRCTU institutions is incuded in Section 8.2. 

8.1  MoAb 17-1A (NSC # 377963, IND # BB-5938) 

AVAILABILITY 

The  manufacturer  of  Monoclonal  Antibody  17-1A  (MoAb  17-1A)  is  Centocor.  The 
antibody for this trial will be supplied by Glaxo Wellcome through the Pharmaceutical 
Management Branch, CTEP, NCI. Antibody may be requested by completing a Clinical 
Drug  Request  (NIH-986)  and  mailing  it  to  the  Drug  Management  and  Authorization 
Section Pharmaceutical Branch, NCI, EPN Room 707, Bethesda, MD 20892, or faxing 
it to (301) 480-4612. For questions call (301) 496-5725. 

MoAb 17-1A is supplied as a single use sterile solution, contained in a heat sterilized 
Type  1,  borosillicate  tubular  glass  vial  capped  with  a  teflon  coated  butyl  rubber 
stopper,  sealed  with  an  aluminum  closure  and  protected  by  a  plastic  flip  off  cap. 
Each vial contains approximately 10 ml of a sterile, non-pyrogenic solution of 100 mg 
17-1A  IgG  murine  monoclonal  antibody  (at  a  concentration  of  10  mg/ml)  in  0.03  M 
sodium  phosphate,  0.15  M  sodium  chloride,  pH  6.0  with  0.01%  Polysorbate  80. 
Because of MoAb 17-1A shelf-life, it is strongly recommended that institutions order 
drug only when an eligible patient has been identified. It is also recommended that 9 
vials  of  MoAb  17-1A  be  ordered  per  patient.  However,  institutions  may  obtain  a 
starter supply (one box) of MoAb 17-1A. 

The  investigator,  or  a  responsible  third  party  designated  by  the  investigator,  must 
maintain a careful record of the inventory and disposition of all drugs received from 
DCT,  using  the  NCI  Drug  Accountability  Record  Form.  (See  the  NCI  Investigator’s 
Handbook for procedures for drug accountability and storage.) 

PREPARATION 

Parenteral  drug  products  should  be  inspected  visually  for  particulate  matter  and 
discoloration  prior  to  administration.  Because  17-1A  is  a  protein  solution,  it  may 
develop a few fine  translucent protein  particles which have not been shown to effect 
its potency. Prior to use, 17-1A should be drawn into a syringe; 10 mL (100 mg) must 
be used for a single infusion. The contents of the syringe must then be filtered from 
the vial through a provided 0.22 µ low-protein binding filter (to be provided by glaxo-
Wellcome) into a glass infusion bottle containing 200-250 mL 0.9% sodium chloride. 
Alternatively,  non-DEHP  (di-2-ethyl-hexyl-phthalate)  polyethelyne  or  ethyl  vinyl 
acetate  infusion  bags  containing  200-250mL  0.9%    sodium  chloride  may  be  used. 
Polyvinyl infusion bags must not be used. The infusate should be mixed gently. If 
the  infusion  is  observed  to  be  cloudy,  it  must  be  disposed  of  and  a  fresh  solution 
must be prepared. 17-1A Injection does not contain a preservative and therefore the 
infusate must be administered as soon as possible after dilution. Any infusate that is 
not administered must be disposed of properly. The color of the solution ranges from 
colorless to light yellow. 

ADMINISTRATION 

The  diluted  17-1A  will  be  administered  by  continuous  intravenous  infusion 
separately  from  other  medications  over  a  2  hour  period.  It  is  recommended  that 
17-1A  be  administered  as  soon  as  possible,  preferably  within  4  to  6  hours  after 
dilution.  Treatment  does  not  require  that  the  patient  be  hospitalized.  The  infusion 
rate  should  not  be  increased  as  patients  may  be  more  likely  to  experience 
adverse reactions. The length  of the infusion  period will be fixed unless an adverse 
experience is observed (see Section 7.0). 

22 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

STORAGE & STABILITY 

Vials of MoAb 17-1A injection should be stored in a secure refrigerator (2°-8°C). Vials 
should  not  be  frozen  or  shaken.  17-1A  does  not  contain  a  preservative;  it  is 
recommended that 17-1A be administered as soon as possible, preferably within 4 to 
6 hours after dilution. Any unused portion should be discarded. 

TOXICITY 

The  most  common  adverse  experiences  reported  thus  far  are  gastrointestinal  and 
include  diarrhea,  abdominal  pain,  nausea  and  vomiting.  The  next  most  common 
events are hypersensitivity reactions, including fever, rigors, flushes/sweating, rash, 
urticaria,  pruritus,  bronchospasm  and  dyspnea.  Other  reported  adverse  experiences 
are back pain, chest pain, generalized pain, headache, arthralgia, fatigue, dyspepsia, 
flatulence,  hypotension,  hypertension,  bradycardia,  tachycardia,  and  hypercalcemia. 
Cerebral infarction, neutropenia, alopecia, colitis, nephrotic syndrome, conjunctivitis, 
myositis,  chromatopsia  (abnormally  colored  vision)  and  deafness  have  been  rarely 
reported.  The  most  severe  adverse  experiences  reported  are  anaphylactic  reactions 
which  should  be  managed  satisfactorily  with  such  drugs  as  epinephrine  and 
antihistamines according to standard medical practice (see Section 7.0). 

8.2  Additional Instructions for CRCTU Institutions 

Procurement:  

CRCTU  will  coordinate  all  drug  requests  for  MoAb  17-1A  to  the  Pharmaceutical 
Management Branch, National Cancer Institute, on behalf of the CRCTU participating 
institutions.  Final shipping approval of study supplies is to be directed by the PMB. 
Once  the  site  is  approved,  the  CRCTU  will  order  a  starter  supply  from  PMB.    The 
CRCTU  study  office  will  reorder  additional  supplies  as  needed  from  PMB.  PMB  will 
authorize  GlaxoWellcome/UK  to  ship  MoAb  17-1A,  sodium  chloride,  and  filters  to 
each  participating  institution.  GW/UK  requires  a  turn  around  time  of  5  working 
days. PMB does not permit the transfer of supplies between sites. 

Accountability: 

Each  study  participant  (investigator  or  designee)  must  maintain  drug  accountability 
records using the NCI accountability form NIH-2564. The accountability records must 
document all receipts, use and destruction of the investigational agent. 

Destruction of unused material: 

In  line  with  the  current  UK  waste  and  transport  regulations,  all  unused  vials, 
partially used vials, returned or rejected clinical supplies material must be destroyed 
at the investigator’s site or by their third party operators.  Material can no longer be 
sent to Speke for destruction.  Full accountability must be performed at the site prior 
to the destruction  of any material and copies of all destructions must be sent to the 
CRCTU  to  then  be  forwarded  to  PMB.  (See  Section  8.1  “Availability”  for  the  PMB 
address.) 

8.3  Additional Instructions for EORTC Institutions:  

Please  refer  to  the EORTC Administrative  Appendix  Section 2 for drug procurement, 
accountability, and destruction information.  

9.0  ANCILLARY THERAPY 

9.1  Patients should receive full supportive care, including transfusions of blood and blood 
products,  antibiotics,  antiemetics  (except  dexamethasone),  etc.,  when  appropriate. 

23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

The  reason(s)  for  treatment,  dosage,  and  the  dates  of  treatment  should  be  recorded 
on the flow sheets. 

9.2  Treatment with hormones or other chemotherapeutic agents may not be administered 
except  for  those  hormones  administered  for  replacement  therapy    (e.g.,  insulin  for 
diabetes, estrogen replacement therapy, etc). 

9.3  Concurrent  treatment  with  systemic  steroids  is  NOT  allowed.  However,  replacement 
steroids  for  adrenal  insufficiency  are  allowed.  Patients  receiving  inhaled  steroids  in 
daily doses of 500m g or less and patients being treated with topical steroids are also 
eligible. 

10.0 CRITERIA FOR RELAPSE 

10.1  Objective Relapse: 

Objective  relapse  will  be  defined  as  the  appearance  of  new  areas  of  local  and/or 
distant  malignant  disease  documented  by  radiologic  imaging  studies  (CTs,  MRI  or 
bone  scans).  A  rise  in  the  serum  CEA  level  alone,  however,  will  not  constitute 
evidence of recurrence, but should prompt reevaluation. 

11.0 REMOVAL OF PATIENTS FROM PROTOCOL THERAPY 

11.1  Duration  of  Treatment:  Patients  with  clear  disease  progression  at  any  time  during 

therapy will be removed from protocol treatment. 

11.2  Extraordinary  Medical  Circumstances:  If,  at  any  time  the  constraints  of  this 
protocol  are  detrimental  to  the  patient’s  health  and/or  the  patient  no  longer  wishes 
to  continue  protocol  therapy,  remove  the  patient  from  protocol  treatment.  In  this 
event: 

•  Notify the Study Chair. 

•  Document  the  reason(s)  for  ending  treatment  on  the  flow  sheets,  and  submit 

C-300 form. 

•  Follow the patient for relapse, progression, second malignancy, and survival. 

12.0 ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING (AER) 

12.1  CALGB Investigators: 

Investigators  are  required  by  Federal  Regulation  to  report  possible  adverse  drug 
reactions.  CALGB  investigators  are  required  to  notify  the  IDB,  the  CALGB  Central 
Office,  the  Study  Chair,  and  their  Institutional  Review  Board.  As  a  tracking 
mechanism,  CALGB  requires  investigators  to  route  toxicity  reports  through  the 
Central  Office  (see  below).  All  investigators  are  required  to  report  secondary 
malignancies  occurring  on  or  following  treatment  on  NCI-sponsored  protocols  using 
commercial  drugs.  Reporting  of  cases  of  secondary  AML/MDS  is  to  be  performed 
using the NCI/CTEP Secondary AML/MDS Report Form. This form should be used in 
place  of  the  form  FDA  #3500  (Medwatch)  or  the  DCT  Adverse  Event  Form  for 
reporting this type of second malignancy. All other secondary malignancies should be 
reported using the form FDA #3500 (Medwatch). CALGB Form C-215, CALGB Notice 
of Second Malignancy, must also be completed for all cases of secondary malignancy. 

12.1.1 Direct questions regarding drug therapy to the Study Chair. 

24 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

12.1.2 Reporting requirements and procedures depend upon: (1) whether investigational 
agents  are  suspected  of  causing  toxicity,  (2)  whether  the  possibility  of  such  a 
toxicity  was  reported  in  the  protocol,  consent  form,  or  manufacturer’s  literature 
(Expected  toxicity),  (3)  the  severity  or  grade  of  the  toxicity,  and  (4)  the  Phase  of 
the  study.  All  reactions  in  a  “reportable”  category  must  be  reported  unless  it  is 
documented  on  flow  sheets  and/or  follow-up  forms  that  the  treatment  is 
definitely not responsible for the toxicity. 

25 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

Adverse Event Reporting Requirements Table 

Phase III 

Grade 1 

Grade 2 

Grade 3 

Grade 4 

Grade 5 

Investigational• 

 

 

 

Expected 

Flow sheets 

Flow Sheets 

Flow Sheets 

Written* 

 

 
Phone/Written# 

Unexpected 

Flow sheets 

Written 

Phone/Written# 

Phone/Written+ 

Phone/Written+ 

•  The  NCI  Adverse  Drug  Reporting  Form  is  used  for  reporting  Phase  I,  II,  and  III  studies 
using investigational agents. “Investigational” includes all investigational agents as well as 
commercially available drugs supplied by NCI under IND held by NCI. 

+  Phone the Study Chair, the Central Office (773-702-9860) and NCI (301-230-2330) within 
24 hours. Complete the NCI adverse drug reaction form and submit to the CALGB Central 
Office within 5 working days, either by mail or by fax (312-345-0117). In addition, toxicity 
must be reported on the flow sheets and in the patient’s chart (unless flow sheets are part 
of patient’s record). 

*  Grade 4 hematosuppression does not have to be reported for agents known and expected 

to cause hematosuppression at the dose used. 

#  Phone  information  ONLY  to  the  Study  Chair  and  to  the  CALGB  Central  Office  within  24 
hours.  The  notification  of  the  Study  Chair  and  to  the  Central  Office  will  allow 
suspension/modification  of  the  study,  if  the  toxicity  is  greater  than  anticipated  before  a 
large  number of patients  are put at risk. Complete the appropriate adverse drug reaction 
form and submit to the CALGB Central Office within 5 working days, either by mail or by 
fax  (312-345-0117).  In  addition,  toxicity  must  be  reported  on  the  flow  sheets  and  in  the 
patient’s chart (unless flow sheets are part of the patient’s record).  

The  reporting of adverse reactions described in the table above is in addition to and 
does not supplant the reporting of toxicities as part of the report of the results of the 
clinical trial, e.g., study summary forms, cooperative group data reporting or Clinical 
Trials  Monitoring  Service  case  report  forms.  All  adverse  reactions  should  also  be 
reported to your local Institutional Review Board. 

All  deaths  during  treatment  or  within  30  days  following  completion  of  active 
protocol therapy must be reported within 5 working days. 

12.2  ECOG Investigators 

ECOG  investigators  are  to  employ  the  CALGB  definitions  of  adverse  event 
reactions, and to follow the AER reporting requirements as outlined in the table 
above. 

ADR  reporting  should  be  based  on  the  CALGB  Common  Toxicity  Criteria  (See 
Appendix I). 

ECOG suggests Adverse Drug Reaction reports be submitted on the Adverse Reaction 
(ADR) Form for Investigational Drugs (Form 391RF), and the form must be signed by 
the  treating  investigator.  However,  the  MedWatch  (FDA  Form  #3500)  is  also 
acceptable  for  reporting  ADRs  on  commercial  arms.  All  ADR  reports  sent  to  ECOG 
are  to  be  accompanied  by  copies  of  all  available  and  updated  study  data  (on-study 
forms,  flow  sheets,  follow-up  forms,  etc.),  as  well  as  evidence  of  notification  to  the 
institutional IRB. 

Guidelines for reporting of toxicities occurring with investigational agents: 

•  Grade 4 or 5 unexpected reactions: 

Call  the  ECOG  Coordinating  Center  and  the  IDB  within  24  hours  of  the 
event. 

Submit  original  written  ADR  form  to  the  IRB  and  a  copy  to  ECOG  within  5 
working days of the event. 

26 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

•  Grade  2-3  unexpected,  or  grade  4-5  expected  toxicities  (NOTE:  Grade  4 

myelosuppression does NOT need to be reported): 

Submit  original  written  report  to  the  IDB  and  a  copy  to  ECOG  within  5 
working days of the event. 

•  Non-Treatment Related Toxicities: 

Toxicities  which  fall  within  the  definitions  listed  above  must  be  reported  as 
an  ADR/second  primary  regardless  of  whether  they  are  felt  to  be  related  to 
treatment  or  not.  Toxicities  unrelated  to  treatment  that  do  NOT  fall  within 
the definitions above, must simply be clearly documented on the ECOG flow 
sheets which are submitted to the ECOG Coordinating Center (ATTN: DATA) 
according to Section 4.3. 

The  ECOG  Coordinating  Center  will  call  the  CALGB  Operations  Office  to  report  the 
telephone  ADR  calls.  The  ADR  forms  will  be  forwarded  to  the  CALGB  Operations 
Office by the ECOG Coordinating Center. 

NCI Telephone Number: (301) 230-2330 
NCI Mailing Address: 
Investigational Drug Branch 
P. O. Box 30112 
Bethesda, MD 20824 
 
 

ECOG Telephone Number: (617) 632-3610 
ECOG Address: 
ECOG Coordinating Center 
Frontier Science 
ATTN: ADR 
303 Boylston Street 
Brookline, MA 02146-7648 

12.3  SWOG Investigators 

All Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) investigators are responsible for the reporting 
of  adverse  drug  reactions  according  to  the  NCI  and  Southwest  Oncology  Group 
Guidelines. SWOG investigators must: 

Call  the  SWOG  Operations  Office  at  210-677-8808  within  24  hours  of  any 
suspected adverse event deemed either drug-related or possibly drug-related. 

Instructions will be given as to the necessary steps to take depending on whether the 
reaction was previously reported, the grade (severity) of the reaction, the study phase, 
and whether the reaction was caused by investigational and/or commercial agent(s). 
The SWOG Operations Office will immediately notify the CALGB Central Office. 

Within  10  days,  the  investigator  must  send  the  completed  (original)  Adverse 
Reaction  (ADR)  Form  for  Investigational  Drugs  (#391R)  or  the  FDA  3500  Form  (for 
regimens using only commercial agents) to the NCI: 

Investigational Drug Branch 
P.O. Box 30012 
Bethesda, Maryland 20824 

In addition, within 10 days, the investigator must send: 

• a copy of the above report 
• all data records for the period covering prestudy through the adverse event  
• documentation of IRB notification to SWOG to the following address: 

ADR Program 
SWOG Operations Office 
14980 Omicron Drive 
San Antonio, TX 78245-3217 

27 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

12.4  NCCTG Investigators 

 

 

Unknown1 

Known2 

Secondary 

Grade 2-3 

Grade 4-5 

Grade 4-5 

AML/MDS3 

Call NCI4 within 24 hours 

Call NCCTG5 w/in 24 hours 

DCT  ADR  form  to  NCCTG 
within 5 working days6 

AML/ MDS 
Report  Form 
within 15 working days6 

to  NCCTG 

 

 

X 

 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

X 

 

 

 

 

X 

1.  Reactions  definitely  not  treatment-related  should  not  be  reported.  However,  a 

report should be submitted if there is a reasonable suspicion of drug effect. 

2.  Grade 4 myelosuppression need not be reported. 

3.  Reporting for this toxicity required during or after treatment. 

4.  Contact 

Investigational  Drug  Branch 

(IDB)  301-230-2330 

(available  24 

hours/day). 

5.  If after hours, notify NCCTG the next working day. 

6.  Fax or mail: 

 

NCCTG Operations Office 
200 First Street, SW 
Rochester, MN 55905 
Fax:  507-284-1902 

The NCCTG Operations Office will immediately forward a copy of the ADR form to the 
CALGB and to the IDB. 

12.5  CRCTU Investigators 

As  soon  as  an  institution  becomes  aware  of  an  adverse  event,  a  CRCTU  Serious 
Adverse Event Form should be completed and faxed to the CRCTU on 0800 731 7625 
(UK  only)  or  +44  (0)121  414  7844  (outside  UK).  The  CRCTU  will  then  notify  the 
CALGB  Central  Office  by  e-mail  and  forward  the  form  on  to  the  CALGB  Central 
Office.  The  CRCTU  will  also  forward  the  form  on  to  the  Medicines  Control  Agency 
(MCA). 

Reporting  of  cases  of  secondary  AML/MDS  is  to  be  performed  using  the  NCI/CTEP 
Secondary  AML/MDS  Report  Form.  This  form  should  be  used  in  place  of  the  form 
FDA  #3500  (Medwatch)  or  the  DCT  Adverse  Event  Form  for  reporting  this  type  of 
second  malignancy.  All  other  secondary  malignancies  should  be  reported  using  the 
form  FDA  #3500  (Medwatch).  The  CALGB  will  then  forward  the  adverse  events 
reports to the Investigational Drug Branch of the NCI. 

12.6  NCIC CTG Investigators 

NCIC CTG investigators are to report all adverse events as listed in section 12.1.2. 

In  addition,  any  adverse  events  (i.e.,  toxicities)  considered  serious  and  unexpected 
and  related  to  protocol  treatment  (see  definitions  below)  must  be  reported  to  NCIC 
CTG  who will  in turn report these events to the Therapeutic Products Programme of 
Health Canada,  

28 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

"Serious" adverse events include any untoward medical occurrence that at any dose: 

• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

results in death 
is life threatening  
requires hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization  
results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or  
is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  

"Unexpected"  toxicities  include  those  which  are  not  consistent  in  terms  of nature or 
severity with the protocol agent information contained in the investigator brochure or 
product monograph.  

"Related"  toxicities  include  any  toxicities  possibly,  probably  or  definitely  related  to 
protocol treatment. 

For  serious  and  related  toxicities  that  are  considered  ‘expected,’  an  increase  in  the 
rate  of  an  occurrence  which  is  judged  to  be  clinically  important  must  also  be 
reported.  Medical  and  scientific  judgement  should  be  exercised  in  deciding  whether 
expedited  reporting  is  appropriate  in  other  situations,  such  as  important  medical 
events  that  may  not  be  immediately  life-threatening  or  result  in  death  or 
hospitalization, but may jeopardise the patient or may require intervention to prevent 
one of the other outcomes listed in the definition above. These should also usually be 
considered serious. 

Adverse events must be reported on the NCIC CTG Serious Adverse Event Form and 
reported by telephone (613-533-6430) and/or fax (613-533-2941) within 24 hours of 
the  event.  Reporting  of  cases  of  secondary  AML/MDS  is  to  be  performed  using  the 
NCI/CTEP  Secondary  AML/MDS  Report  Form.  This  form  should  be  used  in  place of 
the  form  FDA  #3500  (Medwatch)  or  the  DCT  Adverse  Event  Form  for  reporting  this 
type  of  second  malignancy.  All  other  secondary  malignancies  should  be  reported 
using the form FDA #3500 (Medwatch). 

Adverse events will be forwarded to the CALGB Operations Office, the Investigational 
Drug Branch (IDB) and/or the Therapeutic Products Programme of Health Canada by 
NCIC CTG as required.  

12.7   EORTC Investigators 

12.7.1 Secondary malignancies 

"Reporting  of  cases  of  secondary  AML/MDS  is  to  be  performed  using  the 
NCI/CTEP  Secondary  AML/MDS  Report  Form.  All  other  secondary  malignancies 
should be reported  using the form FDA #3500 (Medwatch). The CALGB will then 
forward the forms to the Investigational Drug Branch of the NCI." 

12.7.2 Serious Adverse Event Definitions 

Adverse  Drug  Reactions  (ADR)  are  responses  to  a  drug  which  are  noxious  and 
unintended  and  which  occur  at  doses  normally  used  in  man  for  prophylaxis, 
diagnosis, or therapy of diseases or for modification of physiological function. 

An  Adverse  Event  (AE)  is  any  untoward  medical  occurrence  or  experience  in  a 
patient or clinical investigation subject which occurs following the administration 
of  the  trial  medication  regardless  of  the  dose  or  causal  relationship.  This  can 
include  any  unfavourable  and unintended signs (such as rash or enlarged liver), 
or  symptoms  (such  as  nausea  or  chest  pain),  an  abnormal  laboratory  finding 
(including  blood  tests,  x-rays  or  scans)  or  a  disease  temporarily  associated  with 
the use of the study medication. 

29 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

Responses to a medicinal product (used in the above definitions) means that a 
causal  relationship  between  the  medicinal  product  and  the  adverse  event  is  at 
least a reasonable possibility, i.e. the relationship cannot be ruled out. 

Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAE)  or  Serious  Adverse  Drug  Reactions  (SADR)  are 
defined  as  any  undesirable  experience  occurring  to  a  patient,  whether  or  not 
considered  related  to  the  investigational  drug.  Adverse  events  and  adverse  drug 
reactions  which  are  considered  as  serious  are  those  which  result  in  any  of  the 
following: 

•  death  
•  a life-threatening event (i.e. the patient was at immediate risk of death at 

the time the reaction was observed)  

•  hospitalization or prolongation of hospitalization  
•  persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
•  a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
•  other  medically important condition (i.e. important adverse reactions that 
are  not  immediately  life  threatening  or  do  not  result  in  death  or 
hospitalization but may jeopardize the patient) 

12.7.3 Reporting Procedures 

Non-serious adverse events and non-serious adverse drug reactions 

All  Adverse  Events  (AE)  and  Adverse  Drug  Reactions  (ADR)  occurring  during  the 
treatment  period  until  the  end  of  the  last  cycle  of  treatment  will  be  recorded  on 
the  adverse  event  forms  (C-272).  The  investigator  will  decide  if  those  events  are 
related  to  the  medicinal  product  (i.e.  unrelated,  unlikely,  possible,  probable, 
definitely  and  not  assessable)  and  the  decision  will  be  recorded  on  the  adverse 
event forms (C-272). Adverse Events (AE) definitely not drug related (i.e. reported 
as  unrelated)  will  not  be  considered  as  adverse  drug  reactions  or  toxicity,  but 
reported separately 

The assessment of causality is made by the investigator using the following: 

  
Relationship 
unrelated 
unlikely 

possible 

probable 

definitely 

not 

the 

  
Description 
There is no evidence of any causal relationship 
There  is  little  evidence  to  suggest  there  is  a  causal 
(e.g.  the  event  did  not  occur  within  a 
relationship 
reasonable 
time  after  administration  of 
trial 
medication).  There  is  another  reasonable  explanation  for 
the  event  (e.g.  the  patients  clinical  condition,  other 
concomitant treatments). 
There  is  some  evidence  to  suggest  a  causal  relationship 
(e.g.  because  the  event  occurs  within  a  reasonable  time 
after  administration  of  the  trial  medication).  However,  the 
influence  of  other  factors  may  have  contributed  to  the 
event 
the  patients  clinical  condition,  other 
concomitant treatments). 
There  is  evidence  to  suggest  a  causal  relationship  and the 
influence of other factors is unlikely.  
There is clear evidence to suggest a causal relationship and 
other possible contributing factors can be ruled out. 
There  is  insufficient  or  incomplete  evidence  to  make  a 

(e.g. 

30 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

assessable 

clinical judgement of the causal relationship. 

12.7.4 Serious adverse events or serious adverse drug reactions 

All  Serious  Adverse  Events  (SAE)  and  Serious  Adverse  Drug  Reactions  (SADR) 
occurring during the treatment period and within 30 days after the last treatment 
administration  must  be  reported  to  the  EORTC  Safety  Desk.  Any  late  SAE  or 
SADR  (occurring  after  this  30  day  period)  possibly,  probably  or  definitely related 
to the study treatment should follow the same reporting procedure. This must be 
done by fax within 24 hours of the initial observation of the event. Details should 
be documented on the specified Serious Adverse Event Form(EORTC form 89).  

Please fax the SAE report to: 

EORTC Safety Desk, Fax: +32 2 772 8027 

The Safety Desk will forward all reports within 24 hours of receipt to the CALGB 
Central Office, the EORTC GITCCG Data Management, the company providing the 
Study Drug and the EORTC trial coordinator. 

CALGB Central Office: Fax: +1-312-345 0117 

EORTC  Trial  Co-ordinators:  Pr.  Philippe  ROUGIER,  Fax  +33-1-49095327;    Dr. 
Jose GUIMARAES DOS SANTOS, Fax +351-2-5502745 

In  order  that  the  EORTC  Safety  Desk/sponsor  is  able  to  comply  with  regulatory 
reporting requirements, completed documentation of any reported serious adverse 
events  or  serious  adverse  drug  reactions  must  be  returned  within  10  calendar 
days  of  the  initial  report.  When  the  completed  form  is  not  received  within  this 
deadline, the Safety Desk will make a written request to the investigator. 

Please send the original report to: EORTC Safety Desk, av E. Mounier, 83, bte 
11; B-1200 Brussels, Belgium 

Any  question  concerning  the  SAE  or  SADR  reporting  can  be  asked  to  the  Safety 
Desk by phone: +32 2 774 1676 or e-mail: safetydesk@eortc.be.  

ALL Forms must be dated and signed by the responsible investigator or one 

of his/her authorized staff members. 

13.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

13.1  Background 

The primary objective of this study is to determine whether adjuvant treatment with 
MoAb 17-1A will improve the probability for survival in patients who have undergone 
the resection of a Stage II (Modified Astler-Coller [MAC] B2) colon cancer. Secondary 
end-points  will  be  disease-free  intervals  and  disease-free  survival.  The  study  is 
designed  to  have  sufficient  power  to  detect  a  survival  ratio  of  the  control  group 
hazard to the MoAb 17-1A-group hazard of 1.50. 

This will be an intergroup trial. Patients will be stratified according to their histologic 
parameters  for  prognosis,  i.e.,  degree  of  differentiation,  lymphatic  or  vascular 
invasion, and preoperative serum CEA (see Section 4.2). 

No  recent  Cooperative  Group  trial  has  focused  on  patients  with  Stage  II  (MAC  B2) 
colon  cancer.  However,  the  recently  closed  four-arm  adjuvant  trial,  Intergroup  0089 
(Int-0089),  enrolled  Stage  B2  patients  who  were  at  high  risk  for  recurrence.  For  the 
last  21⁄2  years,  average  accrual  to  Int-0089  was  approximately  144  high-risk  B2 
patients  a  year.  This  study  is  directed  at  low-risk  patients.  Assuming  that  75%  and 

31 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

25%  of  the  Stage  B2  patient  population  can  be  classified  as  low-  and  high-risk 
patients,  respectively,  we  estimate  an  accrual  rate  of  approximately  430  patients  a 
year  to  this  study.  Results  from  the  Intergroup-0035  trial  for  patients  undergoing 
resection  of  Stage  B2  colon  cancer  resulted  in  an  overall  7-year  survival  rate  of 
approximately  72%  for  the  observation  only  group  (2).  For  power  calculations,  since 
that  observed  rate  is  for  high-risk  B2  patients,  we  will  assume  a  higher  7-year 
survival  rate  for  low-risk  patients  in  the  range  of  80%  (or  approximately  a  5-year 
survival rate of 85%) for the control group (no adjuvant treatment) of this study. 

13.2  Sample Size 

Assuming  survival  comparisons  will  be  performed  using  the  logrank  test  at  a  one-
sided 5% significance level, approximately 210 events (deaths) need to be observed in 
order  to  have  90%  power  to  detect  a  survival  hazard  ratio  of  1.50.  Assuming 
exponential  survival  and  a  5-year  survival  rate  of  85%  for  the  control  group  (no 
adjuvant treatment) this corresponds to detecting an improvement in 5-year survival 
to 89.7% for the MoAb 17-1A group. Assuming 2 years of additional follow-up and an 
accrual  rate  of  430  patients  per  year,  accrual  of  2100  patients  would  allow  for 
approximately  5%  patient  ineligibility  and  approximate  90%    power  to  detect  the 
survival difference. With an average annual accrual of 430 patients a year, accrual to 
this study should be complete in less than 4 2/3 years. 

13.3  Analyses 

Survival  will  be  measured  from  time  of  randomization  to  death  from  any  cause. 
Disease-free  intervals  will  be  measured  from  time  of  randomization  to  colon  cancer 
recurrence  where  deaths  without  recurrence  will  be  censored  at  the  time  of  death. 
Disease-free  survival  will  be  measured  from  time  of  randomization  to  colon  cancer 
recurrence or death from any cause. Time-to-event curves will be estimated using the 
Kaplan-Meier method. The logrank test will be used for comparisons of time-to-event 
distributions.  The  Cox  proportional  hazards  model  will  be  used  to  test  the 
simultaneous effects of baseline covariates of survival and disease-free survival. 

13.4  Interim Monitoring 

In  accordance  with  CALGB  Policies  and  Procedures,  this  study  will  be  monitored 
throughout  the  accrual  and  follow-up  periods  by  the  CALGB  Data  and  Safety 
Monitoring Board (DSMB). In addition, accrual, feasibility, and overall toxicity will be 
monitored by the study and committee chairs. 

Formal  analyses  of  the  primary  efficacy  endpoint,  overall  survival  (OS),  and 
secondary  endpoint,  disease-free  survival  (DFS),  will  be  conducted  after  15%  of  the 
expected number of deaths (33/210) are observed.  From that time, interim analyses 
will be performed approximately every six months to coincide with DSMB reviews  

Upper  and  lower  boundaries  will  be  monitored.  Simulations  by  Freidlin, et.al., show 
that for the logrank test the loss of power or increase in Type I error associated with 
frequent  looks  at  the  data  are  acceptably  small.  [36]  A  maximum  of  eight  interim 
analyses is anticipated with two of these occurring before accrual is ended.  

Upper  Boundaries:  The  Lan  and  DeMets  analog  of  the  O’Brien-Fleming  group 
sequential boundary will be used to calculate boundary significance levels at each of 
the  interim  analyses  to  maintain  the  overall  5%  significance  level of the test. Actual 
p-values  less  than  0.005  at  the  time  of  analysis  will  be  truncated  at  0.005.  This 
truncation should  only trivially affect the power of the trial with appropriate interim 
boundaries less extreme than some commonly used procedures (36). Simulations will 
be used to estimate the actual significance level at the time of the final analysis for a 

32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

maximum  of  eight  interim  looks.    We  expect  this  estimated  significance  level  to  be 
approximately 0.04. A total of 210 deaths are expected at the time of final analysis. 

Lower  Boundaries:  At  each  interim  analysis  the  one-sided  upper  99%  confidence 
limit will be constructed for the observed hazard ratio. If the targeted hazard ratio of 
1.5  is  greater  than  this  limit  consideration  will  be  given  to  stopping  the  trial  and 
accepting the hypothesis of no difference in median survival. 

Unless one of the boundaries is reached at an interim analysis, it is anticipated that 
the results will continue to be monitored by the DSMB with release of the data to the 
Study  Committee  two  years  after  accrual  is  closed.  This  is  the  planned  time  of  final 
analysis.  

The CALGB Statistical and Data Management Center will submit quarterly reports to 
CTEP by electronic means using the Clinical Data Update System (CDUS). 

13.5  Women and Minorities 

Women  and  minorities  will  be  eligible  for  this  study  without  alteration  in  eligibility 
criteria. Results from Int-0089 indicate that 55% of the registered patients were male; 
83%  were  white  and  10%  were  black.  Similar  rates  are  expected  for  this  study. 
Treatment  comparisons  for  Stage  B2  colon  cancer  have  been  limited  to  small 
samples. Consequently, there is no evidence that clearly demonstrates that gender or 
race  is  a  factor  in  treatment  effectiveness  for  patients  who  have  undergone  the 
resection of a Stage B2 colon cancer. With a total sample size of over 2000 patients, 
the effects of gender and race will be explored in this study. However, because there 
is no strong evidence to support an interactive effect of treatment by gender or race, 
this  study  will  not  be  designed  to  have  high  power  to  investigate  interactive  effects 
between treatment and gender or race. 

 

33 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

14.0 REFERENCES 

1.  Wingo PA, Tong T, Bolden S. Cancer Statistics, CA, 45: 8-30, 1995. 

2. 

Laurie  JA,  Moertel  CG,  Fleming  TR,  et  al.  Surgical  adjuvant  therapy  of  large-bowel 
carcinoma:  an  evaluation  of  levamisole  and  the  combination  of  levamisole  and 
flourouracil. J Clin Onc 7:1447-56, 1989. 

3.  Moertel  CG,  Fleming  TR,  Macdonald  JS,  et  al.  Flourouracil  and  levamisole  as 
effective adjuvant therapy after resection of stage III colon carcinoma: a final report. 
Ann Int Med 122:321-26, 1995. 

4.  O’Connell M, Malliuard J, Macdonald J, et al. An intergroup trial of intensive course 
5-FU  and  low  dose  leucovorin  as  surgical  adjuvant  therapy  for  high  risk  colon 
cancer [Abstract]. Proc Am Soc Clin Onc 12:190, 1993. 

5.  Wolmark  N,  Rockett  H,  Fisher  B,  et  al.  Leucovorin-modulate  5-FU  (LV-FU)  as 
adjuvant therapy for primary colon cancer [Abstract]. Pro Am Soc Clin Onc 12:197, 
1993. 

6.  NCI  Consensus  Statement.  Adjuvant  therapy  for  patients  with  colon  and  rectum 

cancer. Consensus Statement 8(4):1-25, April 16-18, 1990. 

7.  Maeda  M,  Shoji  M,  Kawagoshi  T,  et  al.  Distribution  of  111In-  and  125I-labeled 
monoclonal  antibody  17-1A  in  mice  bearing  xenografts  of  human  pancreatic 
carcinoma HuP-T4. Cancer 73(3 Suppl): 800-7, 1994. 

8.  Gottinger HG, Funke I, Johnson JP, et al. The epithelial cell surface antigen 17-1A, 
a  target  for  antibody-mediated  tumor  therapy:  its  biochemical  nature,  tissue 
distribution and recognition by different monoclonal antibodies. Int J Cancer 38:47-
53, 1986. 

9.  Herlyn  D,  Koprowski  H.  IgG2a  monoclonal  antibodies  inhibit  human  tumor  growth 

through interaction with effector cells. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 79:4761-65, 1982. 

10.  Adams  DO,  Hall  T,  Steplewski  Z,  et  al.  Tumors  undergoing  rejection  induced  by 
monoclonal  antibodies  of  the  IgG2a  isotype  contain  increased  numbers  of 
macrophages  activated  for  a  distinctive  form  of  antibody-dependent  cytolysis.  Proc 
Nat Acad Sci USA 81:3506-10, 1984. 

11.  Ragnhammar  P,  Magnusson  I,  Masucci  G,  Mellstedt  H.  The  therapeutic  use  of  the 
unconjugated  monoclonal  antibodies  (Mab)  17-1A  in  combination  with  GM-CSF  in 
the treatment of colorectal carcinoma. Med Onc & Tumor Pharm 10:61-70, 1993. 

12.  Reali  E,  Guilliani  AL,  Spisani  S,  et  al.  Interferon  gamma  enhances  monoclonal 
antibody  17-1A-dependent  neutrophil  cytotoxicity  toward  colorectal  carcinoma  cell 
line SW11-16. Clin Immun & Immunopath 71:105-12, 1994. 

13.  Frodin  JE,  Lefvert  AK,  Mellstedt  H.  Pharmocokinetics  of  the  mouse  monoclonal 
antibody  17-1A  in  cancer  patients  receiving  various  treatment  schedules.  Cancer 
Res 50:4866-71, 1990. 

14.  Saleh  MN,  LoBuglio  AF,  Wheeler  RH,  et  al.  A  phase  II  trial  of  murine  monoclonal 
antibody  17-1A  and  interferon-gamma:  clinical  and  immunologic  data.  Cancer 
Immun & Immunother 32:185-90, 1990. 

34 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

15.  Meredith RF, LoBuglio AF, Plott WE, et al. Pharmocokinetics, immune response and 
biodistribution  of  131I-labeled  chimeric  mouse/human  IgG1,k  17-1A  monoclonal 
antibody. J Nucl Med 32:1162-8, 1991. 

16.  Herlyn D, Steplewski Z, Herlyn M, et al. Inhibition of colorectal cancer tumor growth 

in nude mice by monoclonal antibody. Cancer Res 40: 717-21, 1980. 

17.  Johansson C, Segren S, Lindholm  L.  Tumor  growth suppression in nude mice by a 
murine  monoclonal  antibody:  factors  hampering  successful  therapy.  Int  J  Cancer 
48:297-394, 1991. 

18.  Mellstedt H, Frodin JE, Masucci G, et al. Monoclonal antibodies (MAB 17-1A) for the 
treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal carcinomas. Acta Chir Scand Suppl 
549:63-70, 1989. 

19.  Wadler  S. The  role of immunotherapy  in colorectal cancer. Semin Oncol 18 (suppl): 

27-38, 1991. 

20.  Geha  RS.  Idiotype-antiidiotype  interactions  in  humans.  J  Biol  Response  Modifiers 

3:573-9, 1984. 

21.  Verrill  H,  Goldberg  M,  Rosenbaum  R,  et  al.  Clinical  trial  of  Wistar  institute  17-1A 
monoclonal  antibody  in  patients  with  advanced  gastrointestinal  adenocarcinoma:  a 
preliminary report. Hybridoma 5(suppl):175-83, 1986. 

22.  Price  T,  Beatty  BG,  Beatty  JD,  McNally  AJ.  Human  Anti-Murine  Antibody 
Interference In Measurement Of Carcinoembryonic Antigen Assessed With A Double-
Antibody Enzyme Immunoassay. Clin Chem 37(1):51-57, 1991. 

23.  Hansen  JH,  La  Fontaine  G,  Newman  ES,  et  al.  Solving  The  Problem  Of  Antibody 
Interference  In  Commercial  “Sandwhich”-Type  Immunoassays  Of  Carcinoembryonic 
Antigen. Clin Chem 35(1):146-151, 1989. 

24.  Riethmuller  G,  Schneider-Gadicke  E,  Schlimok  G,  et  al.  Randomized  trial  of 
monoclonal antibody for adjuvant therapy of resected Dukes C colorectal carcinoma. 
Lancet 343:1177-83, 1994. 

25.  Goldberg DM, Diamandis EP. Models of neoplasia and their diagnostic implications: 

a historical perspective. Clin Chem 39:2360-74, 1993. 

26.  Hedrick L, Cho KR, Fearon ER, et al. The DCC product in cellular differentiation and 

colorectal tumorigenesis. Genes & Development 8:1174-83, 1994. 

27.  Froggatt NJ,  Levenson  SH, Garner RC. Low Frequency & Late Occurrence of p53 & 

DCC alterations in Colorectal Tumors. J Clin Res & Clin Onc 121(1):7-15, 1995. 

28.  Meling  GI,  Lothe  RA,  Borreson  AL,  et  al.  The  TP53  suppressor  gene  in  colorectal 
carcinomas.  II.  Relation  to  DNA  ploidy  pattern  and  clinicopathologic  variable.  Br  J 
Cancer 67:93-8, 1993. 

29.  Bosari  S,  Viale  G,  Bossi  P,  et  al.  Cytoplasmic  accumulation  of  p53  protein:  an 

independent prognostic indicator in colorectal carcinomas. JNCI 86:681-7, 1994. 

30.  Nathanson  SD,  Linden  MD,  Tender  P,  et  al.  Relationship  among  p53,  stage  and 

prognosis of large bowel cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 37:527-34, 1994. 

35 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

31.  Auvinen A, Isola J, Visakorpi T, et al. Overexpression of p53 and long-term survival 

in colon cancer. Br J Cancer 70:293-6, 1994. 

32.  Pezim ME, Nichols RJ. Survival after high and low ligation of the inferior mesenteric 

artery during curative surgery for rectal cancer. Ann Surg 200:729-33, 1984. 

33.  Wiggers T, Jeekel J, Arends JW, et al. No touch isolation techniques in colon cancer: 

a controlled prospective study. Br J Cancer 75:409-15, 1988. 

34.  Elhadad  A,  Rouffet  F,  Baileet  P.  Curative  resection  of  carcinoma  of  the  left  colon: 
radical  left  hemicolectomy  or  segmental  colectomy?  Prospective  multicentric 
controlled trial [Abstract]. Am Soc Colorectal Surg Mtg. 1993. 

35.  Moertel  CG,  Fleming  TR,  Macdonald  JS,  et  al.  Levamisole  and  flourouracil  for 

adjuvant therapy of resected colon cancer. NEJM 322:352-8, 1990. 

36.  Friedlin,  B.  Korn,  EL.  George,  SL.  Data  monitoring  committees  and  interim 

monitoring guidelines. Controlled Clinical Trial 20:395-407 (1999) 

 

 

36 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

15.0 INFORMED CONSENT FORM 

PHASE III RANDOMIZED STUDY OF ADJUVANT IMMUNOTHERAPY WITH 

MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY 17-1A (MOAB 17-1A) VERSUS NO ADJUVANT THERAPY 

FOLLOWING RESECTION FOR STAGE II (MODIFIED ASTLER-COLLER B2) 

ADENOCARCINOMA OF THE COLON 

We  invite  you  to  take  part  in  a  research  study  for  colon cancer. It is important that you 
read  and  understand  several  general  principles  that  apply  to  all  who  take  part  in  our 
studies:  (a)  taking  part  in  the  study  is  entirely  voluntary;  (b)  personal  benefit  may  not 
result  from  taking  part  in  the  study,  but  knowledge  may  be  gained  that  will  benefit 
others;  (c)  any  significant  new  findings  that  relate  to  your  treatment  will  be  discussed 
with you; (d) you may withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of any 
benefits  to  which  you  are  otherwise  entitled.  The  nature  of  the  study,  the  risks, 
inconveniences,  discomforts,  and  other  pertinent  information  about  the  study  are 
discussed below. 

The  Cancer  and  Leukemia  Group  B  (CALGB)  assures  you  that  your  care  is  our  primary 
concern. Through a variety of opportunities, new knowledge to fight your disease may be 
gained,  both  during  the  course  of  your  treatment  and  later.  Your  cooperation  now  may 
prove  useful  in  years  to  come.  We  understand  your  desire  for  privacy  and  will  use 
standard, accepted methods to protect this right. You are urged to discuss any questions 
you have about this study with your doctor and the staff members who care for you. 

Objectives 

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  attempt:  1)  to  improve  the  chances  of  preventing  the 
return  of  your  cancer;  2)  to  gain  information  about your disease; and, 3) to evaluate the 
usefulness  and  side  effects  of  the  treatment.  It  is  not  possible  to  predict  whether  your 
participation in this study will improve your chances of cure. 

Study Description 

Approximately 2,000 patients will participate in this study to evaluate the effectiveness of 
a  cancer  treatment  using  an  experimental  drug  called  Monoclonal  Antibody  17-1A,  or 
MoAb  17-1A.  This  drug,  and  others  like  it,  currently  are  being  widely  studied  for  their 
potential  for  treating  cancer.  MoAb-17-1A  is  unlike  chemotherapy  drugs  commonly  used 
to  treat  cancer  because  MoAb  17-1A  can  attack  cancer  or  tumor  cells  in  a  way  different 
from these chemotherapy drugs. MoAb 17-1A may improve the chances of preventing the 
return  of  your  type  of  cancer,  although  this  is  not  known.  Because  it  is  not  possible  to 
predict  whether  your  type  of  cancer  will  respond  to  this  drug,  we  will  administer  MoAb 
17-1A  to  only  half  of  the  patients.  It  is  not  clear  at  the  present  time  which  of  the 
treatments  in  this  program  would  be  better  for  you.  For  this  reason,  the  treatment  plan 
offered  to  you  will  be  picked  by  a  method  called  randomization.  Randomization  means 
that  your  physician  will  call  a  statistical  office  which  will  assign  one  of  the  therapies  to 
you. The chances of your receiving either of the treatments are approximately equal. After 
randomization, which will occur after standard surgical removal of your tumor, you would 
receive one of the following treatment programs: 

1) 

2) 

Standard care, i.e., no additional therapy, or 

Five antibody treatments. 

If  you  do  not  receive  the  MoAb  17-1A,  you  will  receive  what  is  accepted  to  be  standard 
practice  for  your  disease,  i.e.,  no  further  treatment  except  for  routine  check-ups  (doctor 
visits  and  tests).  Because  MoAb  17-1A  is  not  available  for  general  use,  the  only  way  the 
antibody may be provided to you is if you participate in this trial, and you are assigned to 
receive it. If you are among those to receive MoAb 17-1A, you will be given this drug by IV 
infusion (through a needle in your arm) over a 2 hour time-period once each 28 days. This 
2-hour infusion will be repeated every 4 weeks for a total of 5 treatments (approximately 5 

37 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

months).  The  treatment  does  not  require  that  you  be  hospitalized.  During  treatment, 
various  blood  tests  and  X-rays  will  be  used  to  determine  whether  your  disease  has 
returned.  If,  at  any  time  during  this  study,  your  cancer  should  return,  you  and  your 
physician will decide on additional treatment for your disease. 

The  CALGB  is  interested  in  performing  special  research  tests  on  tissue,  body  fluids,  or 
other specimens that were obtained from you in the normal course of treatment and care. 
These research tests may be developed during the time you are on treatment or, in some 
cases,  years  later.  We  ask  that  you  give  approval  for  the  performance  of  these  tests  on 
these  specimens.  These  tests  may  provide  additional  information  that  will  be  helpful  in 
understanding  the  disease  or  how  patients  respond  to  treatment.  Tissue,  body  fluids,  or 
other  specimens  obtained  from  you  may  be  used  to  develop  products  that  could  be 
patented or licensed. There are no plans to provide financial compensation to you should 
this occur. 

Risks 

The  treatment  of  colon  cancer  in  this  study  makes  use  of  an  investigational  agent  that 
has side effects, some potentially very serious, but rarely fatal. The specific side effects for 
this drug are listed below; the most common side effects are underlined. Unless otherwise 
specified, the side effects mentioned are reversible. 

Skin changes: Patients may develop a rash or hives, particularly on the hands and feet, 
or may experience severe itching. 

Severe allergic reaction: A fast or slow heart rate, wheezing, low or high blood pressure, 
sweating,  fever,  and  swelling  of  the  face,  mouth,  and  tongue  may  occur  within  a  few 
minutes of treatment. These reactions have generally been controlled with adrenaline. 

This  kind  of  reaction  is  rarely  severe  or  fatal.  The  drug  will  not  be  given  again  if  you 
become  allergic.  You  will  be  observed  closely  while  the  drug  is  given, and medication for 
controlling an allergic reaction will be immediately available. 

Nausea  and  vomiting,  diarrhea,  abdominal  pain,  flatulence,  loss  of  appetite:  If 
needed, nausea medication will be prescribed before and during treatment. 

Flu-like symptoms, fatigue, fever, headaches, or pain in the joints usually go away by 
themselves  about  a  week  after  they  began.  You  may  take  Tylenol®  to  prevent  or  control 
aches, fever, or chills. Patients may experience back or chest pain. 

There have been rare instances of patients developing the following while on MoAb 17-1A: 
bradycardia  (a  slow  heart  rate);  tachycardia  (a  fast  heart  rate);  hypotension  (low  blood 
pressure);  hypertension  (high  blood  pressure);  cerebral  infarction  (a  condition  which  is 
similar  to  a  stroke);  neutropenia  (a  reduction  in  the  number  of  infection-fighting  white 
blood cells that may lead to an increased risk of infection); hair loss; colitis (inflammation 
of  the  colon);  conjunctivitis  (inflammation  of  the  outer  surface  of  the  eye);  myositis, 
(inflammation  of  the  muscles);  nephrotic  syndrome  (kidney  dysfunction  characterized  by 
the  loss  of  protein  in  the  urine);  hypercalcemia  (an  excess  amount  of  calcium  in  the 
blood); chromatopsia (abnormally colored vision); and deafness. 

Unanticipated  side  effects  may  occur  which  have  not  been  reported.  If  you  have  any 
unusual symptoms, report them immediately to your physician. 

38 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

Alternatives 

The  standard  recommended  practice  for  your  cancer  is  to  perform  the  surgery  you  have 
already  undergone  with  no  additional  treatment.  There  is  no  evidence  that  other 
treatments for your disease in addition to surgery offer any improvement in your survival. 

You  should  also  know  that  other  studies  have  been  done  using  the  antibody  treatment 
(panorex) in patients with a  more advanced form of colon cancer. For these patients, the 
standard  treatment  of  their  cancer  is  chemotherapy  (5-Florouracil  and  Leucovorin). 
Panorex  was  tested  in  two  different  ways  in  these  studies.  In  the  first  test,  panorex  was 
given to patients in addition to the standard chemotherapy, and it was not found to make 
the chemotherapy treatment more effective. In the second test, some patients were given 
only  the  standard  chemotherapy  and  some  patients  only  panorex.  In  this  second  test, 
panorex was not found to be as effective as the standard chemotherapy.  

Costs 

Any  procedure related solely to research which would not otherwise be necessary will  be 
explained.  Some  of  these  procedures  may  result  in  added  costs  and  some  of  these  costs 
may  not  be  covered  by  insurance.  For  example,  the  use  of  medications  to  help  control 
side-effects  could  result  in  added  costs.  In  some  cases,  third  party  carriers–insurance 
companies,  health  plans,  Medicare,  or  Medicaid–may  not  cover  these  costs.  Any  care 
required  to  treat  side  effects  (whether  expected  or  unexpected)  will  be  charged  to  you  or 
your insurance company as in the case of standard treatment. 

Investigational Agent Cost Assumption by Patient: Informed Consent 

The  drug  used  in  this  study  is  supplied  to  you  without  charge  by  the  National  Cancer 
Institute (NCI), Glaxo Wellcome Pharmaceutical Company, and Centocor. 

Circumstances  Under  Which  Your  Participation  May  Be  Terminated  Without  Your 
Consent 

If health conditions occur which would make your participation possibly dangerous, or if 
other  conditions  occur  that  would  make  participation  detrimental  to  you  or  your  health, 
then your doctor may discontinue this treatment. 

Patient Protection 

You  may  contact  either  the  investigator  in  charge  or  a  member  of  the  human  protection 
committee of ___________________ Hospital whose names and phone numbers are listed at 
the  end  of  this  form  if,  at  any  point  during  the  duration  of  this  treatment,  you  feel  that 
you have been: 

a. inadequately informed of the risks, benefits, or alternative treatments, or 

b. encouraged to continue in this study beyond your wish to do so. 

In  the  event  that  complications  occur  as  a  result  of  this  treatment,  you  will  be  provided 
with  the  necessary  care.  However,  you  will  not  automatically  be  reimbursed  for  medical 
care or receive other compensation as a result of any complications. 

Participation  is  voluntary.  If  you  choose  not  to  participate  or  wish  to  withdraw  your 
consent  to  participate in this treatment at any  time, it will in no way affect  your regular 
treatments or medical care. 

The  results  of  this  study  may  be  published,  but individual patients  will not be identified 
in these publications. 

A  record  of  your  progress  while  on  the  study  will  be  kept  in  a  confidential  file  at  the 
_______________ Hospital and also in a computer file at the statistical headquarters of the 
CALGB (if you are participating through a Cancer and Leukemia Group B institution), or 

39 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

at the statistical center of one of the following cooperative groups through which you are 
participating: 

•  Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 

•  Southwest Oncology Group 

•  North Central Cancer Treatment Group 

•  Clinical Trials Unit of the CRC Institute for Cancer Studies in Birmingham 

(UK) 

•  National Cancer Institute of Canada  

 

40 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

Results  of  your  tests,  including  blood  samples  and  pathology  slides,  and  confidential 
information contained in your medical record may not be furnished to anyone unaffiliated 
with  the  _______________  Hospital  or  who  is  not  a  researcher  participating  in  this  study 
without  your  written  consent,  except  as  required  by  Federal  regulation.  Your  medical 
record,  including  identifying  information,  may  be  inspected  and/or  photocopied  by  the 
National  Cancer  Institute,  a  qualified  representative  of  the  drug  manufacturer,  the  Food 
and  Drug  Administration,  or  other  Federal  or  state  government  agencies  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  carrying  out  their  governmental  functions.  If  your  record  is  used  or 
disseminated  for  such  purposes,  it  will  be  done  under  conditions  that  will  protect  your 
privacy  to  the  fullest  extent possible consistent with laws relating to public disclosure of 
information and the law-enforcement responsibilities of the agency. 

You  should  understand  that  research  studies  of  patients  may  be  conducted  on  other 
aspects  of  health  care,  which  may  include  topics  such  as  the  cost  and  convenience  of 
treatment, and other issues directly affecting patient care. Your signature below indicates 
your permission to be included in such studies. 

You  will  be  asked  to  complete  a  Background  Information  Form,  to  help  define  groups  of 
patients  being  treated,  so  we  may  better  understand  the  relationship  between  these 
groups  and  the  results  of  their  treatment.  Completion  of  the  form  is  voluntary  and  your 
cooperation is appreciated. 

This  research  project  and  its  treatment  procedures  have  been  fully  explained  to  you.  All 
experimental  procedures  have  been  identified  and  no  guarantee  has  been  given  about 
possible  results.  You  have  had  the  opportunity  to  ask  questions  concerning  any  and  all 
aspects of the project and any procedures involved. 

Your signature indicates that you have read this form, have received acceptable answers 
to  any  questions,  authorize  the  use  of  your  bodily  fluids  and  tissue  samples  for  the 
research  described  above,  and  willingly  consent  to  participate.  You  will  receive  a  copy  of 
this form. 

__________________________________________ 
(Patient's Signature) 

_____________________________ 
(Date) 

__________________________________________ 
(Physician’s Signature) 

_____________________________ 
(Date) 

__________________________________________ 
(Witness's Signature) 

_____________________________ 
(Date) 

__________________________________________ 
(Name of Responsible Investigator) 

_____________________________ 
(Phone #) 

__________________________________________ 
(Name of IRB Representative) 

_____________________________ 
(Phone #) 

41 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX I 

 
 
 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

 
 
 
 

1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

Toxicity grade should reflect the most severe degree or most abnormal lab value 
occurring during the evaluated period. 

Toxicity  grade  =  5  if  that  toxicity  caused  or  contributed  to  the  death  of  the 
patient. 

If patient at baseline has grade 1 or greater, do not code unless patient worsens 
due  to  toxicity.  If  there  is  worsening,  code  the  level  to  which  the  patient 
increases - DO NOT adjust for baseline. 

 
4.  Note that for some toxicity certain grades are not defined and may not be coded, 

e.g., no grade 3 or 4 alopecia. 

 
5.  Granulocytes  (mature  cells)  refers  to  segmented  neutrophils  (Segs,  Polys,  PMN, 
Polymorphonuclear  leukocytes)  plus  bands  (Staff  cells,  Stabs).  To  calculate 
granulocyte  count  multiply  the  white  count  by  the  %  bands  +  %  segmented 
neutrophils. 

 
6. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

All  coded  toxicities  must  be  documented  and  described  on  accompanying 
flowsheets. 

 
 

 

November 1, 1995 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

(Adapted from Common Toxicity Criteria, SWOG Toxicity Criteria, CALGB Toxicity  Grading) 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

0 

1 

Grade 

2 

 

3 

 

4 

 

3.0-3.9 

2.0-2.9 

1.0-1.9 

< 1.0 

75.0-normal 

50.0-74.9 

25.0-49.9 

< 25.0 

10.0-normal 

8.0-10.0 

6.5-7.9 

1.5-1.9 

1.0-1.4 

0.5-0.9 

< 6.5 

< 0.5 

1.5-1.9 

1.0-1.4 

0.5-0.9 

< 0.5 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

life threatening 

mild, no 
transfusion 

gross, 1-2 units 
transfusion per 
episode 

gross, 2-4 units 
transfusion per 
episode 

mild no active 
treatment, (e.g., 
viral syndromes 

moderate 
requires 
outpatient PO 
antibiotic 

severe requires 
IV antibiotic or 
antifungal or 
hospitalization 

 

 

 

able to eat 
reasonable 
intake 

intake 
significantly 
decreased but 
can eat 

no significant 
intake 

1 episode in 24 
hrs 

2-5 episodes in 
24 hrs 

6-10 episodes in 
24 hrs 

increase of 2-3 
stools/day over 
pre-Rx 

increase of 4-6 
stools/day, or 
nocturnal stools, 
or moderate 
cramping 

increase of 7-9 
stools/day or 
incontinence, or 
severe cramping 

painless ulcers, 
erythema, or 
mild soreness 

painful 
erythema, 
edema, or 
ulcers, but can 
eat 

painful 
erythema, 
edema, ulcers, 
and cannot eat 

massive, >4 
units 
transfusion per 
episode 

life-threatening 
(e.g., septic 
shock) 

 

-- 

>10 episodes in 
24 hrs or 
requiring 
parenteral 
support 

increase of >10 
stools/day, or 
grossly bloody 
diarrhea, or 
need for 
parenteral 
support 
requires 
parenteral or 
enteral support 

TOXICITY 
 
HEMATOLOGIC 
 
WBC 
 
PLT 
 
Hgb 
 
Granulocytes/ 
Bands 
 
Lymphocytes 
 
Hematologic-
Other 
 
HEMORRHAGE 
(clinical) 
 
 

>4.0 

WNL 

WNL 

>2.0 

>2.0 

 

none 

INFECTION 

none 

none 

none 

GASTROINTESTINAL 
 
Nausea 
 
 
 
 
Vomiting 
 
 
 
 
 
Diarrhea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stomatitis 
 
 
 
 

none 

none 

 

Page 1 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

Esophagitis/ 
Dysphagia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anorexia 

none 

painless ulcers, 
erythema, mild 
soreness, or mild 
dysphagia 

painful 
erythema, 
edema, or ulcers 
or moderate 
dysphagia but 
can eat without 
narcotics 

cannot eat solids 
or requires 
narcotics to eat 

requires 
parenteral or 
enteral support 
or complete 
obstruction or 
perforation 

none 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

 

Page 2 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

1 

antacid 

Grade 

2 

3 

4 

requires vigorous 
medical 
management or 
non-surgical 
treatment 

uncontrolled by 
medical 
management; 
requires surgery 
for GI ulceration 

perforation or 
bleeding 

-- 

-- 

intermittent, no 
intervention 

requires 
intervention 

requires 
operation 

-- 

yes 

-- 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

erythema, or 
mild pain not 
requiring 
treatment 

patchy & 
produces 
serosanguinous 
discharge or 
requires non-
narcotic for pain 

confluent 
fibrinous 
mucositis or 
requires narcotic 
for pain or 
ulceration 

necrosis 

 

-- 

 

 

 

<1.5 x N 

1.5 -  3.0 x N 

>3.0 x N 

<2.5 x N 

2.6 - 5.0 x N 

5.1 -  20.0 x N 

>20.0 x N 

0 

no 

no 

no 

-- 

none 

 

WNL 

WNL 

WNL 

<2.5 x N 

2.6 - 5.0 x N 

5.1 -  20.0 x N 

>20.0 x N 

no change from 
baseline 

-- 

-- 

precoma 

hepatic coma 

-- 

 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

life threatening 

 

 

 

 

WNL 

<1.5 x N 

1.5 - 3.0 x N 

3.1 -  6.0 x N 

>6.0 x N 

no change 

1+ or <0.3 g% or 
<3 g/l 

4+ or >1.0 g% or 
>10 g/l 

nephrotic 
syndrome  

TOXICITY 
 
Other GI: 
   Gastritis/ 
   Ulcer 
 
 
 
 
Small Bowel 
Obstruction 
 
Intestinal Fistula 
 
GI -  
other 
 
OTHER 
MUCOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIVER 
 
Bilirubin 
 
Transaminase 
(SGOT, SGPT) 
 
Alk Phos 
 or 
5’ nucleotidase 
 
Liver - 
 clinical 
 
Liver - 
Other 
 

KIDNEY, 
BLADDER 
 
Creatinine 
 
Proteinuria 

2 - 3+ or 0.3 - 
1.0 g% or 3 - 10 
g/l 
 
gross, no clots  

Hematuria 

neg 

micro only 

gross + clots 

BUN mg% 
 

 

WNL, <20 

21-30 

31-50 

>50 

Page 3 of 9 

requires 
transfusion 
-- 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

Hemorrhagic 
Cystitis 

none 

blood on 
microscopic 
exam 

frank blood no 
treatment 
required 

bladder 
irrigation 
required 

Renal Failure 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

requires 
cystectomy or 
transfusion 
 
dialysis required 

 

Page 4 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

0 

TOXICITY 
 
OTHER Kidney/Bladder: 
 
Incontinence 

normal 

 

Grade 

2 

 

1 

 

with coughing 
sneezing, etc. 

Dysuria 
 

none 

mild pain 

Urinary 
Retention 
 

none 

no change 

Increased 
Frequency/ 
Urgency 
 

urinary residual 
>100cc or 
occasionally 
requires catheter 
or difficulty 
initiating urinary 
stream 
 
increase in 
frequency or 
nocturia up to 
2x normal 

spontaneous 
some control 
 
painful or 
burning 
urination, 
controlled by 
pyridium 
 
self 
catheterization 
always required 
for voiding 

increase >2x, 
but <hourly 

Bladder Cramps  
 
Ureteral 
Obstruction 

none 

none 

-- 

yes 

unilateral, no 
surgery required 

bilateral, no 
surgery required 

4 

 

-- 

-- 

-- 

3 

 

no control 

not controlled by 
pyridium 

surgical 
procedure 
required (TUR or 
dilation) 

with urgency 
and hourly or 
more or requires 
catheter 
 
-- 

-- 

-- 

not complete 
bilateral, but 
stents, 
nephrostomy 
tubes or surgery 
required 
 
yes 

complete 
bilateral 
obstruction 

-- 

GU Fistula 
 
Kidney/Bladder 
- Other 
 

none 

-- 

-- 

mild 

ALOPECIA 

no loss 

mild hair loss 

-- 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

 

 

 

pronounced or 
total hair loss 
 

-- 

 

-- 

 

none or no 
change 

no change of 
pO2>85 and 
pCO2 <40 

asymptomatic, 
with abnormal-
ity in PFT’s 
 
pO2>70 and 
pCO2<50, but 
not grade  

dyspnea on 
significant 
exertion 

dyspnea at 
normal level of 
activity 

dyspnea at rest 

pO2>60 and 
pCO2 <60 but 
not grade 0-1 
 

pO2>50 and 
pCO2<70 but 
not 0-2 

pO2<50 or 
pCO2>70 

Page 5 of 9 

11/15/04 

PULMONARY 
 
Dyspnea 

pO2/pCO2 

 

CALGB 9581 

Carbon 
Monoxide 
Diffusion 
Capacity (DLCO) 
 
Pulmonary 
Fibrosis 

>90% of 
pretreatment 
value 

decrease to 76 - 
90% of 
pretreatment 

decrease to 51 - 
75% 
pretreatment 

decrease to 26 - 
50% 
pretreatment 

decrease to 
<25% of 
pretreatment 

normal 

radiographic 
changes, no 
symptoms 

-- 

changes with 
symptoms 

-- 

 

Page 6 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

 

Grade 

2 

-- 

1 

-- 

3 

4 

radiographic 
changes and 
diuretics 
 

requires 
intubation 

Radiographic 
changes 
symptoms do 
not require 
steroids 
 
present 
 
mild 

steroids required  oxygen required 

requires assisted 
ventilation 

-- 

-- 

-- 

moderate 

severe 

life threatening. 

no change 

mild, relieved by 
OTC meds 

requires narcotic 
antitussive 
 

uncontrolled 
coughing 
spasms 

-- 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

 

 

 

 

asymptomatic, 
transient, 
requiring no 
therapy 

recurrent or 
persistent, no 
therapy required 

requires 
treatment 

TOXICITY 
 
Pulmonary 
Edema 

0 

none 

Pneumonitis 
(non-infectious) 

Normal 

Pleural Effusion 
 
Adult 
Respiratory 
Distress 
Syndrome 
 
Other 
Pulmonary: 
Cough 
 
Pulmonary -  
Other 
 

HEART 
 
Cardiac 
Dysrhythmias  

none 

none 

-- 

 

none 

requires 
monitoring; or 
hypotension, or 
ventricular 
tachycardia, or 
fibrillation 
 
severe or 
refractory CHF 
 

mild CHF, 
responsive to 
therapy 

angina without 
evidence for 
infarction 

acute myocardial 
infarction 

symptomatic 
effusion; 
drainage 
required 

tamponade; 
drainage 
urgently 
required 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

Cardiac 
Function 

none 

asymptomatic, 
decline of resting 
ejection fraction 
by less than 20% 
of baseline value 

Cardiac-
ischemia 

none 

non-specific T- 
wave flattening 

Cardiac-
pericardial 

none 

Heart- 
Other 
 

 

asymptomatic, 
effusion, no 
intervention 
required 
 
mild 

asymptomatic, 
decline of resting 
ejection fraction 
by more than 
20% of  baseline 
value 
 
asymptomatic, 
ST and T wave 
changes 
suggesting 
ischemia 
 
pericarditis (rub, 
chest pain, ECG 
changes) 

 

Page 7 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXCITY CRITERIA 

TOXICITY 
CIRCULATORY 
 
Hypertension 

0 
 

none or no 
change 

Hypotension 

none or no 
change 

Phlebitis/ 
Thrombosis/ 
Embolism 

-- 

 

Grade 

2 
 

1 
 

asymptomatic, 
transient 
increase by 
greater than 20 
mm Hg (D) or to 
>150/100 if 
previously WNL. 
No treatment 
required. 

changes 
requiring no 
therapy 
(including 
transient 
orthostatic 
hypotension) 
 
-- 

recurrent or 
persistent 
increase by 
greater than 20 
mm Hg (D) or to 
>150/100 if 
previously WNL. 
No treatment 
required 
 
requires fluid 
replacement or 
other therapy 
but not hospital-
ization 

3 
 

4 
 

requires therapy  hypertensive 

crisis 

requires therapy 
and 
hospitalization; 
resolves within 
48 hrs of  
stopping the 
agent 

requires therapy 
and 
hospitalization 
for >48 hrs after 
the stopping 
agent 

superficial 
phlebitis (not 
local) 

Deep vein 
thrombosis 

major event 
(cerebral/hepatic
/pulmonary/ 
other infarction) 
or pulmonary 
embolism 
 
4+, generalized 
anasarca 

 

-- 

paralysis 

coma, seizures, 
toxic psychosis 

Edema 

none 

1+ or dependent 
in evening only 

2+ or dependent 
throughout day 
 

NEUROLOGIC 

 

 

 

Neuro- 
sensory 

none or no 
change 

mild par-
esthesias, loss of 
deep tendon 
reflexes 

mild or moderate 
objective sensory 
loss; moderate 
paresthesias 
 

Neuro- 
motor 

none or no 
change 

subjective 
weakness; no 
objective 
findings 

Neuro- 
cortical 

none 

mild somnolence 
or agitation  

mild objective 
weakness 
without 
significant 
impairment of 
function 
 
moderate 
somnolence or 
agitation 

3+ 

 

severe objective, 
sensory loss or 
paresthesias 
that interfere 
with function 
 
objective 
weakness with 
impairment of 
function 

severe: 
somnolence or 
agitation or 
confusion or 
disorientation, or 
hallucinations or 
aphasia, or 
severe difficulty 
communicating 
 

 

Page 8 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

Neuro-cerebellar 
 

none 

slight incoor-
dination, 
dysdiadokinesis 

intention tremor, 
dysmetria, 
slurred speech, 
nystagmus 

locomotor ataxia  cerebellar 

necrosis 

 

Page 9 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

TOXICITY 
Neuro- 
mood 

0 
anxiety-none 
depression-none 

1 
mild anxiety 
mild depression 

Grade 

Neuro- 
headache 

none 

mild 

2 
moderate anxiety 
moderate 
depression 
 
moderate or 
severe but 
transient 
 
moderate 

Neuro- 
constipation 
 
Neuro- 
hearing 

none or no 
change 

none or no 
change 

mild 

asymptomatic, 
hearing loss on 
audiometry only 

tinnitus 

none or no 
change 

-- 

-- 

none 

mild 

moderate 

3 
severe anxiety 
severe 
depression 

4 
severe agitation 
suicidal ideation 

unrelenting and 
severe 

-- 

severe 

ileus >96 hrs 

hearing loss 
interfering with 
function but 
correctable with 
hearing aid 
 
symptomatic 
subtotal loss of 
vision 
 
severe 

deafness not 
correctable 

blindness 

intolerable 

Neuro- 
vision 
 

Pain 
 
Other Neuro: 
Behavioral 
Change 

Dizziness/  
Vertigo 
 
Taste 
 

no change 

none 

normal 

Insomnia 

normal 

Neurologic 
Other 

-- 

DERMATOLOGIC 

Skin 

none or no 
change 

Local 

none 

pain 

change, not 
disruptive to pt. 
or family 
 
non-disabling 

slightly altered 
taste, metallic 
taste 
 
occasional 
difficulty 
sleeping may 
require sleeping 
pills 
 
mild 

disruptive to pt. 
or family 

harmful to 
others or self 

psychotic 
behavior 

-- 

disabling 

markedly altered 
taste 

-- 

-- 

difficulty 
sleeping despite 
medication 

-- 

-- 

-- 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

 

 

 

 

scattered 
macular or 
papular eruption 
or erythema that 
is asymptomatic 

scattered 
macular or 
papular eruption 
or erythema with 
pruritus or other 
associated 
symptoms 

pain and 
swelling with 
inflammation or 
phlebitis 

generalized 
symptomatic 
macular, 
papular, or 
vesicular 
eruption 

exfoliative 
dermatitis or 
ulcerating 
dermatitis 

ulceration 

plastic surgery 
indicated 

 

Page 10 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

ALLERGY 

none 

transient rash, 
drug fever <38C, 
100.4F 

urticaria, drug 
fever >38C 
100.4F, mild 
bronchospasm 

serum sickness, 
bronchospasm, 
req. parenteral 
meds 

anaphylaxis 

 

Page 11 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

1 
 

Grade 

2 
 

3 
 

4 
 

37.1 - 38.0C 
98.7 - 100.4F 

38.1C - 40.0C 
100.5 - 104.0F 

>40.0C 
>104.0F for less 
than 24 hrs 

TOXICITY 
FLU-LIKE 
SYMPTOMS 
 
Fever in absence 
of infection 

0 
 

none 

>40.0C (104.0F) 
for more than 24 
hrs. or fever 
accompanied by 
hypotension 
-- 

-- 

-- 

Chills 

none 

mild or brief 

-- 

disabled 

-- 

normal 

mild 

normal 

none 

mild and 
occasional 

mild, able to 
continue normal 
activities 
(PS1) 
 

-- 

mild 

pronounced or 
prolonged 
 
decrease in 
ability to move 

frequent or 
drenching 
 
impairment of 
normal daily 
activity or bed 
rest <50% of 
waking hours 
(PS2) 
 
moderate 

in bed or in 
chair >50% of 
waking hours 
(PS3) 

bed ridden or 
unable to care 
for self 
(PS4) 

severe 

life-threatening 

Myalgia/ 
Arthralgia 
 
Sweats  

Malaise/ 
Fatigue* 

Flu- 
Like Symptoms- 
Other 
 

WEIGHT GAIN 
 
WEIGHT LOSS 
 
METABOLIC 
 
Hyperglycemia 

Hypoglycemia 
 
Amylase 
 
Hypercalcemia 
 
Hypocalcemia 

Hypo- 
magnesemia 
 
Hyponatremia 

Hypokalemia 

<5.0% 

<5.0% 

 

<116 

>64 

WNL 

5.0-9.9% 

10.0-19.9% 

>20.% 

5.0-9.9% 

10.0-19.9% 

>20.% 

-- 

-- 

 

 

 

 

116 - 160 

161 - 250 

251 - 500 

55 - 64 

40 - 54 

30 - 39 

>500 or 
ketoacidosis 
 
<30 

<1.5 x N 

1.5 - 2.0 x N 

2.1 - 5.0 x N 

>5.1 x N 

<10.6 

10.6 - 11.5 

11.6 - 12.5 

12.6 - 13.5 

>13.5 

>8.4 

>1.4 

8.4 - 7.8 

7.7 - 7.0 

6.9 - 6.1 

1.4 - 1.2 

1.1 - 0.9 

0.8 - 0.6 

<6.0 
 
<0.5 

no change or 
> 135 
 
no change or  
> 3.5 

131 - 135 

126 - 130 

121 - 125 

<120 

3.1 - 3.5 

2.6 - 3.0 

2.1 - 2.5 

Metabolic-Other 

-- 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

 

Page 12 of 9 

<2.0 
 
 
life-threatening 
 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

COAGULATION 

 

 

 

 

 

Fibrinogen 
 

WNL 

0.99 - 0.75 x N 

0.74 - 0.50 x N 

0.49 - 0.25 x N 

<0.24 x N 

 

Page 13 of 9 

11/15/04 

TOXICITY 
Prothrombin 
Time 
 
Partial 
thromboplastin 
time 
 
Coagulation 
Other 
 
ENDOCRINE 
 
Impotence/ 
Libido 
 
Sterility 
 
Amenorrhea 
 
Other 
Endocrine: 
 
Gynecomastia 
 
Hot flashes 

CALGB 9581 

CALGB EXPANDED COMMON TOXICITY CRITERIA 

 

Grade 

0 
WNL 

1 
1.01 - 1.25 x N 

2 
1.26 - 1.50 x N 

3 
1.51 - 2.00 x N 

WNL 

1.01 - 1.66 x N 

1.67 - 2.33 x N 

2.34 - 3.00 x N 

-- 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

4 
>2.00 x N 
 

>3.00 x N 
 

life-threatening 
 

 

 

decrease in 
normal function 

-- 

yes 

 
 
mild 

normal 

-- 

no 

 
 
normal 

 

-- 

-- 

-- 

 
 
pronounced or 
painful 
 

none 

mild or <1/day  moderate and 

>1/day 

pronounced 

 

absence of 
function 

yes 

-- 

 
 
-- 

frequent and 
interferes with 
normal function 
 
-- 

 

-- 

-- 

-- 

 
 
-- 

-- 

-- 

Cushingoid 
 
Endocrine 
Other 
 
EYE 
Conjunctivitis/ 
Keratitis 

normal 

-- 

 
none 

Dry Eye 

normal 

mild 

mild 

 
erythema or 
chemosis not 
requiring 
steroids or 
antibiotics 
 
-- 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

 
requires 
treatment with 
steroids or 
antibiotics 

 
corneal 
ulceration or 
vivible 
opacification 

 
-- 

requires artificial 
tears 

-- 

requires 
enucleation 
 

-- 

Glaucoma 
 
Eye 
Other 
 

 

no change 

-- 

-- 

yes 

-- 

mild 

moderate 

severe 

life-threatening 

Page 14 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

 

 
CALGB 
(ZUBROD) 
 
Performances 
Status 
 

KARNOFSKY 
 
Performance 
Status % 
 

PSO  
Normal 

 

 

*PERFORMANCE STATUS 

 

 

 

 

PS1 

PS2 

PS3 

Fatigue without 
significant 
decrease in daily 
activities 

Fatigue with 
significant 
impairment of 
daily activities or 
bedrest <50% of 
waking hours 
 

Bedrest >50% of 
waking hours 

PS4 

Bedridden or 
unable to care 
for self 

 

 

 

 

100 - 90 

80 - 70 

60 - 50 

40 - 30 

20 - 10 

CONVERSIONS/FORMULAS 

a) Body Temperature     F° = C° x 9/5 + 32 
                                     C° = F° - 32 x 5/9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Metric measures        1 inch = 2.54 cm 
                                      2.2 lbs. = 1 kg 
 

 

 
 
 
c) Granulocyte Count WBC 2.2; Segs 61%;  
                                  Bands 4%;  
                                  2200 x .65 = 1430 

 

Page 15 of 9 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX II 

 

SURGICAL STRATEGY 

 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX II 

 

SURGICAL STRATEGY 

 

SURGERY 

The  goal  of  surgery  in  the  treatment  of  carcinoma  of  the  colon  is  to  provide  local  tumor 
control  with  the  removal  of  the  cancer  with  the  intent  of  cure.  The  technique  by  which 
this is done is usually with a segmental resection of the colon including the cancer with a 
wide margin. The blood vessels and associated lymphatic channels leading to the segment 
of colon are also removed, although the extent of the mesenteric and lymphatic resection 
is debatable and will be discussed below. 

TECHNIQUE 

Most  resections  of  the  colon  are  done  under  a  general  anesthetic,  although  for  tumors 
approached through a lower abdominal incision, an epidural anesthetic can also be used 
in  patients  with  significant  co-morbid  disease.  Either  a  midline  incision  or  specific 
transverse  incisions  can  be  used  to  enter  the  peritoneal  cavity.  A  transverse  incision  is 
generally  recommended  only  if  the  location  of  the  tumor  is  identified  on  a  preoperative 
barium enema. At the time of colonoscopy the location of a tumor can also be identified if 
a landmark such as the ileocecal valve is relatively close to the cancer. Other issues to be 
considered  preoperatively  are  colonoscopic  marking  of  a  small  tumor  or  malignant  polyp 
with ink so as to be able to identify the lesion at the time of surgery because these lesions 
often times are not palpable. Another technique to help identify small lesions is to perform 
intraoperative  colonoscopy  and  to  have  the  endoscopist  transilluminate  the  bowel  at  the 
site of the lesion. 

For  tumors  of  the  cecum,  right  colon,  transverse  colon,  and  splenic  flexure,  a  standard 
supine position on the operating table can be used. For tumors of the left colon, sigmoid, 
and  recto-sigmoid  (above  the  peritoneal  reflection)  it  is suggested that lithotomy position 
be considered if transanal staplers are to be used. 

Upon opening the abdomen a full exploration needs to be performed. Particular attention 
needs  to  be  given  to  the  liver  and  the  periportal  lymph  nodes. Small metastatic deposits 
can  sometimes  be  unrecognized  on  preoperative  studies  and  are  only  appreciated  by  the 
surgeon’s  palpating  hand.  If  at  all  possible,  a  suspected  metastatic  lesion  should  be 
biopsied  to  confirm  the  diagnosis.  Histologic  confirmation  of  a  metastasis  has  important 
implications for the exclusion criteria of this study. 

Currently, some of the contentious issues involved with colon cancer surgery include the 
necessity of a high ligation versus a low ligation in the transection of the lymphovascular 
bundle  to  a  particular  segment  of  bowel.  At  the  present  time,  there  has  been  no 
prospective  randomized  study that has shown a survival  difference in patients who have 
undergone  a  high  ligation  versus  a  low  ligation  (32).  We  recommend,  however,  that  as 
high a ligation as possible be done to a particular segment of bowel leaving approximately 
one  to  two  centimeters  of  the  main  trunk  of  the  vessel  so  as  to  be  able  to  reclamp  the 
residual trunk should a suture slip off. It is anticipated that this technique will provide an 
adequate  number  of 
for  correct  pathologic  staging.  Other 
recommendations  concerning  vascular  ligation  will  be  made  during  discussion  of  the 
specific  segmental  resections.  Another  uncertain  issue  is  that  of  early  vascular  isolation 
(Turnbull  technique).  Again,  no  prospective  randomized  trial  comparing  early  vascular 
isolation  and  exclusion  of  the  bowel  with  other  techniques  has  shown  a  significant 
survival difference (33). It is therefore not recommended that this technique be performed 
for colon cancer surgery. 

lymph  nodes 

(~6) 

The  overall  resection  margins  for  colon  cancer  should  be  at  least  5  cms  of  normal  colon 
between the edge of the tumor and the cut margin. An exception of this general rule can 
be made for tumors of the distal sigmoid or rectosigmoid, where 2.5 cm of distal margin is 

Page 1 of 3 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX II 

not  associated  with  an  increase  in  local  recurrence  and  further  resection  with  a  larger 
margin may lead to a more difficult and higher risk anastomosis. 

SEGMENTAL RESECTIONS: 

RIGHT HEMICOLECTOMY 

A right hemicolectomy includes resection of the very distal portion of the terminal ileum, 
the  cecum,  the  ascending  colon  and  the  proximal  transverse  colon.  This  particular 
segmental  resection  is  used  for  tumors  of  the  cecum,  ascending  colon,  and  hepatic 
flexure.  The  resection  includes  removal  of  the  corresponding  mesentery  including  the 
ileocolic and right colic arteries, in addition to the right branch of the middle colic. For 
tumors  of  the  hepatic  flexure  and  proximal  transverse  colon,  an  extended  right 
hemicolectomy  can  be  done  and  a  more  generous  ligation  of  the  middle  colic  artery 
needs  to  be  performed,  down  to  the  trunk  of  the  middle  colic  near  the  superior 
mesenteric artery. No data exists to show that removal of the middle colic mesentery for 
cecal lesions makes a difference in overall prognosis. 

TRANSVERSE COLECTOMY 

For  cancers  of  the  transverse  colon,  an  extension  of  the  right  hemicolectomy  can  be 
performed  for  proximal  lesions.  The  mobility  of  the  transverse  colon  varies,  and  for 
patients  with  very  mobile  and  redundant  transverse  colons,  a  resection  of  the 
transverse  colon  and  the  middle  colic  artery  with  an  anastomosis  of  the  hepatic  to 
splenic flexures can be performed. For tumors of the distal transverse colon and splenic 
flexure,  a  subtotal  colectomy  with  resection  of  the  cecum,  ascending  colon,  transverse 
colon  and  splenic  flexure  can  be  done  with  an  anastomosis  of  the  ileum  to  the 
descending colon. This kind of an anastomosis often is used with obstructing or nearly 
obstructing lesions where the proximal bowel is not adequately prepped. As in all these 
resections, the mesenteric resection needs to be taken down to the origin of the middle 
colic artery. Also, it is recommended that the entire omentum to the transverse colon be 
removed. 

LEFT COLECTOMY 

Traditionally,  a  left  hemicolectomy  is  performed  for  patients  with  tumors  of  the 
descending  and  proximal  sigmoid  colon.  In  addition,  current  practice  has  it  that  the 
patient should undergo a resection of the lymphovascular bundle down to the origin of 
the inferior mesenteric artery near its origin from the aorta. A recent trial, however, has 
shown  that  a  simple  segmental  resection  with  removal  of  the  lymphovascular  bundle 
down  to  the  origin  of  the  left  colic  leads  to  a  similar  survival  when  compared  with  a 
more  radical  left  hemicolectomy  (34).  In  either  case,  it  is  important  to  obtain  a  wide 
mesenteric resection. At times, particularly in elderly patients with vascular disease, an 
anastomosis  to  the  residual  sigmoid  will  be  tenuous,  and  in  those  patients  it  is 
recommended  that  an  anastomosis  to  the  proximal  rectum  be  performed  to  ensure  an 
adequate blood supply. 

SIGMOID RESECTION 

For  carcinoma  of  the sigmoid colon, one can limit the resection to the  sigmoid with its 
mesentery  containing  the  sigmoid  arteries  and  the  superior  hemorrhoidal  artery.  The 
left  colic  artery  can  be  preserved  and  an  anastomosis  can  be  performed  between  the 
descending colon and the proximal rectum. 

PATHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS 

If  possible,  all  cancers  should  be  documented  preoperatively  with  a  biopsy  through  the 
colonoscope. If the diagnosis is an adenoma (either villous or tubulovillous), as opposed to 
a carcinoma, a standard oncologic resection, as has been described, should be performed 
because  of  the  probability  that  these  large  sessile  lesions  (>  2  cms)  will  have  an  area  of 
invasive  carcinoma.  For  the  pathologist,  the  distal  and  proximal  ends  of  the  resection 

Page 2 of 3 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX II 

should  be  clearly  marked.  We  also  recommend  marking  the  apex  of  the  lymphovascular 
bundle. We do not recommend obtaining frozen section confirmation of negative margins 
in  patients  whose  margin  of  grossly  normal  colon  is  5  cm  or  greater.  For  certain 
companion  protocols,  fresh  tumor  needs  to  be  obtained  as  soon  after  the  specimen  is 
removed as possible. In such cases, one must communicate with the pathologist from the 
operating  room  in  order  to  facilitate  the  fresh  freezing  of  a  portion  of  the  surgical 
specimen. 

QUALITY CONTROL 

The  operative  report  must  contain  a  detailed  description  of  the  operative  findings  with 
specific  reference  of  the  extent  of  disease,  the  presence  or  absence  of  metastasis,  and 
whether  any  adjacent  organs  were  adherent  to  and/or  removed  with  the  specimen.  The 
procedure must be classified as ‘curative’ or ‘non-curative’ by the operating surgeon. 

Legible copies of the operative note and pathology report must be submitted to the 
appropriate  cooperative  group  for  routing  to  the  CALGB  DMC  for  review.  It  is  also 
helpful to include a drawing of the portion of the colon that was removed along with 
the blood supply and lymphatic drainage. The surgeon will mark the location of the 
tumor and indicate the extent of the colonic and mesenteric resection. 

 

Page 3 of 3 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

PATHOLOGY PRACTICE GUIDELINES FOR CALGB INVESTIGATORS 

APPENDIX III 

 

 
 

 

 

11/15/04 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

 
 

PATHOLOGY PRACTICE GUIDELINES* 

FOR CALGB INVESTIGATORS 

 

 

CARCINOMA  

OF THE  

COLON AND RECTUM 

 

Edited by  

Carolyn C. Compton, M.D., PhD. 

Chairman, CALGB Pathology Committee 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  These  guidelines  have  been  developed  by  the  Cancer  Committee  of  the  College  of  American 
Pathologists  (CAP)  and  have  been  published  in  the  Archives  of  Pathology  and  Laboratory 
Medicine.    They  represent  CAP  policy  and  have  been  adapted  for  CALGB  use  by  the  Surgical 
Pathology Committee of the Pathology Core of the CALGB with the permission of the CAP. 
 
©1997  College  of  American  Pathologists.  All  rights  reserved.  None  of  the  content  of  this 
publication  may  be  reproduced,  stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or  by 
any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without prior written 
permission of the publisher.  
 

1 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

 

COLON 

AND 

RECTUM 

 

Pathology Practice Guidelines for CALGB Investigations 

 

Protocol applies to all carcinomas of the colon, and rectum.  
Carcinoid tumors, lymphomas, and sarcomas are excluded. 

 

Procedures: 

 

Incisional Biopsy 

Excisional Biopsy, Polypectomy 

Local Excision (Transanal Disk Excision) 

Resection 

 
 
 
 

Authors 

Carolyn C. Compton, M.D., Ph.D., Donald Earl Henson, M.D.,  

Robert V. P. Hutter, M.D.;.  

Leslie H. Sobin, M.D.; and Harold E. Bowman, M.D. 

 

Task Force Members 

L. Peter Fielding, M.D., Rodger C. Haggitt, M.D., Gerald E. Hanks, M.D.,  

Kenneth D. McClatchey, M.D.,D.D.S., Mary L. Nielsen, M.D., Ali Qizilbash, M.D., Robert R. 

Rickert, M.D., Charles R. Smart, M.D., Steven Sternberg, M.D.,  

Sidney Winawer, M.D., David Winchester, M.D. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©1997  College  of  American  Pathologists.  All  rights  reserved.  None  of  the  content  of  this 
publication  may  be  reproduced,  stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted  in any form or by 

2 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without prior written 
permission of the publisher.  

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

3 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

 

COLON / RECTUM 

 

Incisional (Endoscopic) Biopsy 

 

- previous colon adenoma(s)/carcinoma(s) 
- familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome 
- hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer syndrome 
- familial hamartomatous polyposis syndrome 
- inflammatory bowel disease 

CLINICAL INFORMATION 
 
Patient identification 
 Name 
 Identification number 
 Age (birth date) 
 Gender 
 
Responsible physician(s) 
 
Date of procedure 
 
Other clinical information 
Relevant history 
  
  
  
  
  
 Relevant findings (eg, colonoscopic and/or imaging studies) 
 Clinical diagnosis (eg, Crohn’s disease) 
 Procedure (eg, colonoscopic biopsy) 
 Operative findings 
 Anatomic site(s) of specimen(s) 
 
 
MACROSCOPIC EXAMINATION 
 
Specimen 
 Unfixed/fixed (specify fixative) 
 Number of pieces 
 Largest dimension of each piece 
 Obstruction (partial/complete) 
 Description of other tissues (as appropriate) 
Results of intraprocedural consultation 
 
Submit entire specimen for microscopic evaluation 
 
Special  studies  (specify)  (eg,  histochemistry,  immunohistochemistry,  morphometry,  DNA 
analysis [specify type], cytogenetic analysis) 
 
 

4 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

MICROSCOPIC EVALUATION 
 
Tumor (Note A) 
  Histologic type (Note B) 

 Histologic grade (Note C) 
 Extent of invasion  
  
Additional pathologic findings , if present 
 Colitis 
 Adenoma 
 Other(s) 
 
Results/status of special studies (specify) 
 
Comments 
Correlation with intraprocedural consultation, as appropriate 
Correlation with other specimens, as appropriate 
 Correlation with clinical information, as appropriate 
 

5 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

COLON / RECTUM 

 

Excisional Biopsy, Polypectomy 

 

- previous colon adenoma(s)/carcinoma(s) 
- familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome 
- hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer syndrome 
- familial hamartomatous polyposis syndrome 
- inflammatory bowel disease 

CLINICAL INFORMATION 
 
Patient identification 
 Name 
 Identification number 
 Age (birth date) 
 Gender 
 
Responsible physician(s) 
 
Date of procedure 
 
Other clinical information 
 Relevant history 
  
  
  
  
  
 Clinical diagnosis 
 Procedure (eg, polypectomy) 
 Operative findings 
 Anatomic site(s) of specimen(s) 
 
 
MACROSCOPIC EXAMINATION 
 
Specimen 
 Tissue(s) included 
 Unfixed/fixed (specify fixative) 
 Number of pieces 
 Dimensions  
 Orientation (if indicated by surgeon) 
 Descriptive features (eg, color, consistency) 
 Results of intraoperative consultation 
 
Polyp 
 Configuration  
 Size (three dimensions) 
 If pedunculated length of stalk 
 Dimension of carcinoma (diameter) 
 Estimated extent of invasion of carcinoma 
 

6 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

- polyp apex and stalk or base in same section (if possible) 
- carcinoma, point of deepest invasion 
- cross section of polyp stalk (as appropriate) 

Tissue(s) submitted for microscopic evaluation 
 Transverse section(s) through polyp, include: 
  
  
  
 Frozen section tissue fragment(s) (if applicable) 
 
Special  studies  (specify)  (eg,  histochemistry,  immunohistochemistry,  morphometry,  DNA 
analysis [specify type], cytogenetic analysis) 
 
 
MICROSCOPIC EVALUATION 
 
Polyp 
 Histologic type 
 
Tumor (Carcinoma within polyp) 
 Histologic type (Note B) 
 Histologic grade (Notes C and D) 

 Extent of invasion (pT) (Note D): 
 Blood/lymphatic vessel invasion (Note D) 
 Distance of carcinoma from margin (Note D) 
 
Results/status of special studies (specify) 
 
Comments 
 Correlation with intraoperative consultation 
 Correlation with other specimens, as appropriate 
 Correlation with clinical information, as appropriate 
 

7 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

COLON / RECTUM 

 

Local Excision (Transanal Disc Excision) 

 
 

- previous colon adenoma(s)/carcinoma(s) 
- familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome 
- hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer syndrome 
- familial hamartomatous polyposis syndrome 
- inflammatory bowel disease 

CLINICAL INFORMATION 
 
Patient identification 
 Name 
 Identification number 
 Age (birth date) 
 Gender 
 
Responsible physician(s) 
 
Date of procedure 
 
Other clinical information 
 Relevant history 
  
  
  
  
  
 Relevant findings (eg, colonoscopic and/or imaging studies) 
 Clinical diagnosis 
 Procedure (eg, transanal resection) 
 Operative findings 
 Anatomic site(s) of specimen(s) 
 
 
MACROSCOPIC EXAMINATION 
 
Specimen 
 Unfixed/fixed (specify fixative) 
 Number of pieces 
 Dimensions  
 Obstruction 
 Orientation of specimen (if indicated by surgeon) 
 Descriptive characteristics (eg, color, consistency) 
 Layers of colon/rectum present (if grossly discernible) 
 Results of intraoperative consultation 
 

8 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Tumor (Note A) 
 Configuration (Note E) 
 Dimensions (three dimensions) 
 Distance of tumor edge from closest margin 

- points of deepest penetration 
- interface with adjacent colon 
- margin closest to tumor edge  

 Estimated depth of invasion 
 Lesions in noncancerous colon (eg, colitis, polyps) 
 
Additional pathologic findings, if present 
 
Tissue(s) submitted for microscopic evaluation 
 Carcinoma, including: 
  
  
  
 Frozen section tissue fragment(s) 
 
Special  studies  (specify)    (eg,  histochemistry,  immunohistochemistry,  morphometry,  DNA 
analysis [specify type], cytogenetic analysis) 
 
 
MICROSCOPIC EVALUATION 
 
Tumor 
 Histologic type (Note B) 
 Histologic grade (Note C) 
 Depth of invasion (pT) (Note F) 
 Blood/lymphatic vessel invasion (Note G) 
 Perineural invasion (Note G) 
 Extramural venous invasion (Note H) 
 Peritumoral lymphocytic response (Note I) 
  
Margins  
 Distance of carcinoma from closest mucosal margin and/or deep  
 margin 
  
 
Additional pathologic findings, if present 
 Colitis 
 Dysplasia 
 Adenomas 
 Hyperplastic polyps 
 Other(s) 
 
Results/status of special studies(specify) 
 
Comments 
 Correlation with intraoperative consultation 
 Correlation with other specimens, as appropriate 
 Correlation with clinical information, as appropriate 

 

9 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

COLON / RECTUM 

 

Colon / Colorectal Resection 

 

- previous colon adenoma(s)/carcinoma(s) 
- familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome 
- hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer syndrome 
- familial hamartomatius polyposis syndrome 
- inflammatory bowel disease 

CLINICAL INFORMATION 
 
Patient identification 
 Name 
 Identification number 
 Age (birth date) 
 Gender 
 
Responsible physician(s) 
 
Date of procedure 
 
Other clinical information 
 Relevant history 
  
  
  
  
  
 Relevant findings (eg, colonoscopic and/or imaging studies) 
 Clinical diagnosis 
 Procedure (eg, right colectomy, transverse colectomy, left colectomy,  
  
 Operative findings 
 Anatomic site(s) of specimen(s) (eg, cecum, right, transverse,  
  
 
 
MACROSCOPIC EXAMINATION 
 
Specimen 
 Organ(s)/tissue(s) included 
 Unfixed/fixed(specify fixative) 
 Number of pieces 
 Dimensions  
 Orientation of specimen (if indicated by surgeon) 
 Results of intraoperative consultation 
 

sigmoidectomy, abdomino-peroneal resection) 

descending, sigmoid colon, or rectum) 

10 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Tumor 
 Location (Note A) 
 Configuration (Note D) 
 Dimensions (three dimensions) 
 Descriptive characteristics (eg, color, consistency) 
 Ulceration/perforation 
 Distance from margins (Note J) 
  
  
  

- proximal 
- distal 
- radial (soft tissue margin or serosa closest to deepest tumor penetration) 

- points of deepest penetration 
- interface with adjacent colon/rectum 
- visceral serosa overlying tumor 

 Estimated depth of invasion (Note F): 
 
Lesions in noncancerous colon/rectum (eg, colitis, other polyps) 
 
Regional lymph nodes (Note F) 
 
Metastasis to other organ(s) or structure(s) (Note F) 
 
Colon/rectum uninvolved by tumor 
 
Other tissue(s)/organ(s) 
 
Tissues submtted for microscopic evaluation 
 Carcinoma, including: 
  
  
  
 Margins (Note J) 
  
  
  
 All lymph nodes (Note F) 
 Other lesions (eg, polyps/colitis) 
 Frozen section tissue fragment(s) 
 
Special  studies    (specify)  (eg,  histochemistry,  immunohistochemistry,  morphometry,  DNA 
analysis [specify type], cytogenetic analysis) 
 
 
MICROSCOPIC EVALUATION 
 
Tumor 
 Histologic type (Note B) 
 Histologic grade (Note C) 

- proximal 
- distal 
- radial (soft tissue margin closest to deepest tumor penetration) 

 Extent of invasion (pT) (Note F) 
 Blood/lymphatic vessel invasion (Note G)  
 Perineural invasion (Note G) 
 Extramural venous invasion (Note H) 
 Peritumoral lymphocytic response (Note I) 
 Associated pericolorectal abscess formation (if present) 
 Associated pneumatosis intestinalis (if present) 
 

11 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Margins (Note J) 
 Proximal 
 Distal 
 Radial (specify distance of carcinoma from closest radial margin) 
 
Regional lymph nodes (pN) (Note F): 
 Number 
 Number with metastases  
 
Additional pathologic findings, if present 
 Inflammatory bowel disease 
 Dysplasia 
 Adenomas 
 Other types of polyps 
 
Distant metastasis (pM1) ,specify site (Note F) 
 
Other tissue(s)/organ(s) 
 
Results/status of special studies (specify) 
 
Comments 
 Correlation with intraoperative consultation 
 Correlation with other specimens, as appropriate 
 Correlation with clinical information, as appropriate 
 

12 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 

 

A. ANATOMIC SITES 
The protocol applies to all carcinomas arising in the colon, rectum, and vermiform appendix.(1)  
 
The  colon  is divided into four parts:  the right (ascending colon), the middle (transverse) colon, 
the left (descending) colon, and the sigmoid colon.  The right colon is subdivided into the cecum 
(peritoneally located and measuring about 6 x 9 cm) and the ascending colon (retroperitoneally 
located and measuring 15 to 20 cm long).  The descending colon, also located retroperitoneally, 
is 10 to 15 cm in length.  The descending colon becomes the sigmoid colon at the origin of the 
mesosigmoid,  and  the  sigmoid  colon  becomes  the  rectum  at  the  termination  of  the 
mesosigmoid.    The  upper  third  of  the  rectosigmoid  segment  is  covered  by  peritoneum  on  the 
front and both sides.  The middle third is covered by peritoneum only on the anterior surface.  
The lower third (also known as the rectum or rectal ampulla) has no peritoneal covering.(1) 
 
Tumors  located  at  the  border  between  two  subsites  of  the  colon  (eg,  cecum  and  ascending 
colon) are registered as tumors of the subsite that is more involved.  If two subsites are involved 
to  the  same  extent,  the  tumor  is  classified  as  an  "overlapping"  lesion.    The  rectum  is  defined 
clinically  as  the  distal  large  intestine  commencing  opposite  the  sacral  promontory  and  ending 
at  the  upper  border  of  the  anal  canal.    When  measuring  below  with  a  rigid  sigmoidoscope,  it 
extends 16 cm from the anal verge.  A tumor is classified a rectal if its inferior margin lies less 
than 16 cm from the anal verge or if any part of the tumor is located at least partly within the 
supply  of  the  superior  rectal  artery.(2)    A  tumor  is  classified  as  rectosigmoid  when 
differentiation between rectum and sigmoid according to the above guidelines is not possible.(3) 
 
 
B. HISTOLOGIC TYPES 
For  consistency  in  reporting,  the  histologic  classification  proposed  by  the  World  Health 
Organization is recommended and is shown below.(4) However, this protocol does not preclude 
the use of other systems of classification or histologic types.  
 
World Health Organization Classification of Colorectal Carcinoma 
 Adenocarcinoma in situ/severe dysplasia 
 Adenocarcinoma 
 Mucinous (colloid) adenocarcinoma (>50% mucinous) 
 Signet-ring cell carcinoma (>50% signet-ring cells)* 
 Squamous cell (epidermoid) carcinoma 
 Adenosquamous carcinoma 
 Small-cell (oat cell) carcinoma** 
 Undifferentiated carcinoma** 
 Other (specify) 
 
* By convention, signet ring cell carcinomas are assigned Grade 3 (see below). 
 
** Small cell carcinomas and undifferentiated (histologic type) carcinomas are assigned Grade 4 
(see below). 
 
The term “carcinoma, NOS” (not otherwise specified) is not part of the WHO classification. 
 

13 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Poorly differentiated  

Poorly differentiated (5-49% of tumor composed of glands)  

C. HISTOLOGIC GRADE 
A suggested grading system for adenocarcinoma of the colon and rectum is as follows: 
 
Grade X   Grade cannot be assessed 
Grade 1  Well differentiated (>95% of tumor composed of glands)  
Grade 2  Moderately differentiated (50-95% of tumor composed of glands) 
Grade 3 
Grade 4   Undifferentiated (<5% of tumor composed of glands) 
 
Histologic  grades  for  the  rare  colorectal  squamous  carcinomas  are  shown  below.    If  there  are 
variations  in  the  differentiation  within  the  tumor,  the  highest  (least  favorable)  grade  is 
recorded.   
 Grade X   Grade cannot be assessed 
 Grade 1   Well differentiated  
 Grade 2   Moderately differentiated  
 Grade 3  
 [Grade 4   Undifferentiated*] 
 
*Undifferentiated  tumors  cannot  be  categorized  as  squamous  and  are  classified  as 
"undifferentiated  carcinomas"  in  the  WHO  classification  of  tumor  types  (see  above)  which  are, 
by definition, grade 4. 
 
Histologic  grade  has  been  demonstrated  by  multivariate  analyzes  to  have  independent 
prognostic value.(5-10) 
 
D. CARCINOMA IN AN ADENOMATOUS POLYP  
Colorectal adenomas containing invasive adenocarcinoma that extends through the muscularis 
mucosae into the submucosa have been defined "malignant polyps." These polyps constitute a 
form  of  early  (ie,  curable)  colorectal  carcinoma.  The  definition  of  malignant  polyps  excludes 
adenomas  containing  in  situ  carcinoma  (also  known  as  intraepithelial  carcinoma)  and 
carcinoma either limited to the lamina propria of the polyp mucosa or invading no deeper than 
the  muscularis  mucosae  (intramucosal  carcinoma)  because  these  polyps  possess  no  biological 
potential for metastasis. The term "malignant polyp" encompasses both polypoid carcinomas in 
which the entire polyp head is replaced by carcinoma and adenomas with focal malignancy. 
 
Malignant  polyps  removed  by  endoscopic  polypectomy  require  evaluation  of  histologic 
parameters that have been determined to be significant prognostic factors related to the risk of 
adverse  outcome  (ie,  lymph  node  metastasis  or  local  recurrence  from  residual  malignancy) 
following  polypectomy.(11-26)    Pathologic  features  that  have  been  shown  to  have  independent 
prognostic significance and are crucial for evaluating risk and determining the possible need for 
further surgical treatment (ie, segmental colectomy) include: 
 - histologic grade of the carcinoma 
 - extent (level) of invasion of the carcinoma within the polyp 
 - status of the resection margin 
 - lymphatic/venous vessel involvement 
 
Specifically, an increased risk of adverse outcome has been shown to be associated with: 
 - grade 3 (poorly differentiated) carcinoma 
 - tumor at or less than 1 mm from the resection margin 
 - presence of lymphatic/venous vessel involvement 
 
E. TUMOR CONFIGURATION 
Configurations  include  exophytic  (fungating),  endophytic  (ulcerative),  and  diffusely  infiltrative 
(linitis  plastica),  or  annular,  but  overlap  among  these  types  is  common.  Exophytic  is  divided 

14 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Primary tumor cannot be assessed 
No evidence of primary tumor 
Carcinoma in situ - intraepithelial or invasion of the lamina propria or  
muscularis mucosae** 
Tumor invades the submucosa 
Tumor invades the muscularis propria 
Tumor invades through the muscularis propria into the subserosa  
or into the nonperitonealized pericolic or perirectal tissues*** 
pT3a - minimal invasion:<1 mm beyond the border of the muscularis propria 
pT3b - slight invasion: 1-5 mm beyond the border of the muscularis propria 
pT3c - moderate invasion :> 5-15 mm beyond the border of the muscularis propria 
pT3d - extensive invasion: > 15 mm beyond the border of the muscularis propria 
Tumor directly invades other organs or structures† (T4a)  
or perforates the visceral peritoneum † † (T4b) 

into  pedunculated  and  sessile.  Gross  tumor  type  has  no  independent  influence  on  prognosis 
with  the  possible  exception  of  the  uncommon  linitis  plastica  type  which  has  an  unfavorable 
prognosis.(5) In some studies, a pushing border rather than infiltrative border has been shown 
to be an independent marker of favorable prognosis.(5) 
 
F. TNM AND STAGE GROUPINGS 
Surgical  resection  remains  the  most  effective  therapy  for  colorectal  carcinoma,  and  the  best 
estimation  of  prognosis  is  related  to  the  pathologic  findings  on  the  resection  specimen.  The 
anatomic extent of disease is by far the most important prognostic factor.(5)  
 
The  protocol  recommends  the  TNM  Staging  System  of  the  AJCC  /UICC  (1,6)  but  does  not 
preclude the use of other staging systems. 
 
Tumor (T)* 
TX 
TO 
Tis 
  
T1 
T2 
T3 
  
  
  
  
  
T4 
  
 
* The designation "T" refers to the first resection of a primary tumor.  The symbol "pT" refers to 
the  pathologic  classification  of  the  TNM,  as  opposed  to  the  clinical  classification.    Pathologic 
classification  is  based  on  gross  and  microscopic  examination.    pT  entails  a  resection  of  the 
primary  tumor  or  biopsy  adequate  to  evaluate  the  highest  pT  category;  pN  entails  removal  of 
nodes adequate to validate lymph node metastasis; and pM implies microscopic examination of 
distant lesions.  Clinical classification (cTNM) is usually carried out by the referring physician 
before treatment during initial evaluation of the patient or when pathologic classification is not 
possible.(1) 
 
The  absence  or  presence  of  residual  tumor  following  nonsurgical  therapy  (eg,  chemoradiation 
treatment) may be described by the symbol "R" and classified as follows:7 
 RX 
 R0 
 R1 
 R2 
If residual tumor is present, its extent may be documented by the TNM preceded by symbol "y" 
symbol (e.g., ypT).(1) 
 
Local recurrence following a previous resection should be classified as above with the prefix "r" 
(eg.  rpT1)  and  the  recurrent  tumor  topographically  assigned  to  the  proximal  segment  of  the 
anastomosis.(1,3) 
 
**For  colorectal  carcinomas,  carcinoma  in  situ  (Tis)  includes  cancer  cells  confined  within  the 
glandular  basement  membrane  (intraepithelial)  or  invasive  into  the  mucosal  lamina  propria 

Presence of residual tumor cannot be assessed 
No residual tumor 
Microscopic residual tumor 
Macroscopic residual tumor. 

15 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

(intramucosal).  Extension  may  be  into  but  not  through  the  muscularis  mucosae.  Extension 
through  the  muscularis  mucosae  into  the  submucosa  is  classified  as  T1.  Some  pathologists 
classify in situ carcinoma under the diagnostic term severe, or high-grade, dysplasia, especially 
in cases of inflammatory bowel disease.(7) 
 
***The extent of perimuscular invasion has been reported to influence prognosis whether or not 
regional lymph node metastasis is present.  Thus, optional expansion pT3 has been proposed. 
(3)  However, since extension >5mm is the critical subdivision demonstrated to have an adverse 
effect  on  prognosis  in  most  studies,  a  simpler  subdivision  combining  pT3a  and  b  as  well  as 
pT3c  and  d  may  be  justified.(3)    Extension  of  the  tumor  within  lymphatics  or  veins  does  not 
count as local spread of tumor as defined by the T classification. (3) 
 
†  Direct  invasion  of  other  organs  or  structures  includes  invasion  of  other  segments  of 
colorectum  by  way  of  the  serosa  or  mesocolon  for  example,  invasion  of  the  sigmoid  colon  by 
carcinoma of the cecum. Intramural extension of tumor from one subsite (segment) of the large 
intestine into an adjacent subsite or into the ileum (eg. for a cecal carcinoma) or anal canal (eg, 
for a rectal carcinoma) does not affect the pT classification.(3) 
 
† † A free perforation of a colorectal  carcinoma into the peritoneal cavity is classified as T4.(3) 
Subdivision  of  T4   into T4a and b is justified because the frequency of distant metastasis has 
been  shown  to  be  greater  with  perforation  of  the  visceral  peritoneum  (about  50%)  than  with 
direct invasion of adjacent organs or structures without perforation of the visceral peritoneum 
(about 30%).9  Furthermore, the median survival time following surgical resection for cure has 
been shown to be shorter for patients with pT4b tumors compared to those with pT4a tumors 
(with or without distant metastasis) as follows.(3) 
 

 
pT4a,M0 
pT4b,M0 
pT4a,M1 
pT4b,M1 

 
 

5-Year Survival Rate  Median Survival Time (mo) 

49% 
43% 
12% 
0% 

58.2 
46.2 
22.7 
15.5 

16 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed 
No regional lymph node metastasis 
Metastasis in 1 to 3 lymph nodes 
Metastasis in 4 or more lymph nodes**,*** 

Regional Lymph Nodes (N)* 
 NX 
 NO 
 N1 
 N2 
 
*The regional lymph nodes for the anatomical subsites of the large intestine are as follows: 
Cecum and appendix - anterior cecal, posterior cecal, ileocolic, right colic 
Ascending colon - ileocolic, right colic, middle colic 
Hepatic flexure - middle colic, right colic 
Transverse colon - middle colic 
Splenic flexure -middle colic, left colic, inferior mesenteric 
Descending colon - left colic, inferior mesenteric, sigmoid 
Sigmoid colon - inferior mesenteric, superior rectal sigmoidal, sigmoid mesenteric 
Rectosigmoid  -  perirectal,  left  colic,  sigmoid  mesenteric,  sigmoidal,  inferior  mesenteric, 
superior rectal, middle rectal 
Rectum - perirectal, sigmoid mesenteric, inferior mesenteric, lateral sacral, presacral, internal 
iliac, sacral promontory, superior rectal, middle rectal, inferior rectal 
 
**Nodes  along  the  sigmoid  arteries  are  considered  pericolic  nodes,  and  their  involvement  is 
classified as N1 or N2 according to the number involved. 
 
***Perirectal lymph nodes include the mesorectal (paraproctal), lateral sacral, presacral, sacral 
promontory  (Gerota),  middle  rectal  (hemorrhoidal),  and  inferior  rectal  (hemorrhoidal)  nodes.  
Metastasis in the external iliac or common iliac nodes is classified as distant metastasis.(3) 
 
Important  note  A  tumor  nodule  >3  mm  in  diameter  in  the  perirectal  or  pericolonic  adipose 
tissue  without  histologic  evidence  of  residual  node  in  the  nodule  is  classified  as  regional 
perirectal/pericolonic  node  metastasis.  However,  a  tumor  nodule  <  3  mm  in  diameter  is 
classified in the T category as discontinuous extension (ie, T3).(3) Multiple metastatic foci seen 
microscopically only in the pericolonic fat should be considered as metastasis in a single lymph 
node for classification.(1) 
 
Distant Metastasis (M) 
 MX 
 M0 
 M1 
 
*Seeding of abdominal organs is considered M1.  
 
Stage Groupings 
 Stage 0 
 Stage I 
  
 Stage II 
  
 Stage III 
  
 Stage IV 
 

Presence of distant metastasis cannot be assessed 
No distant metastasis 
Distant metastasis* 

Tis* 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
Any T 
Any T 
Any T 

M0 
N0 
M0 
N0 
M0 
N0 
M0 
N0 
M0 
N0 
M0 
N1 
N2 
M0 
Any N  M1 

17 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

G. LYMPHATIC AND PERINEURAL INVASION 
In  several  studies,  both  lymphatic  invasion  and  perineural  invasion  have  been  shown  by 
multivariate analysis to be independent indicators of poor prognosis.(9,10,27-29) 
 
H. VENOUS INVASION 
Extramural  venous  invasion  has  been  demonstrated  by  multivariate  analysis  to  be  an 
independent  adverse  prognostic  factor.(9,10,29-31)  Invasion  of  extramural  veins  in  particular 
have been shown to be an independent indicator of unfavorable outcome and increased risk of 
occurrence of hepatic metastasis.(31,32) 
 
I. PERITUMORAL LYMPHOCYTIC RESPONSE 
A  conspicuous  lymphoid  reaction  at  the  leading  edge  of  invasive  tumor  or  the  presence  of 
lymphoid  aggregates  in  the  surrounding  tissues  (muscularis  external  and  pericolonic  or 
perirectal fat) have both been shown to be independent favorable prognostic factors.(8,32-34) 
 
J. TUMOR PERIPHERY: GROWTH PATTERN  
The  growth  pattern  of  the  tumor  at  the  advancing  edge  has  been  shown  to  have  prognostic 
significance  independent  of  stage  and  may  predict  liver  metastasis.(36-42)    Specifically,  an 
infiltrating pattern of growth at the tumor border as opposed to a pushing border is an adverse 
prognostic factor.   
 
Infiltrating borders have been defined as follows:(37) 
Naked Eye Examination 
• 
• 
 
Microscopic Examination of Slides  
• 

Inability to define limits of invasive border of tumor and/or 
Inability to resolve host tissue from malignant tissue 

"Streaming dissection" of muscularis propria (dissection of tumor through the full thickness 
of the muscularis propria without stromal response) and/or 

•  Dissection  of  mesenteric  adipose  tissue  by  small  glands  or  irregular  clusters  or  cords  of 

cells and/or 

•  Perineural invasion 
 
Irregular  growth  at  the  tumor  periphery  has  also  been  referred  to  as  "focal  dedifferentiation" 
and  "tumor  budding"  and  defined  as  microscopic  clusters  of  undifferentiated  cancer  cells  just 
ahead of the invasive front of the tumor.   
 
K. MARGINS 
It may be helpful to mark the margin(s) closest to the tumor with ink. Margins marked by ink 
should be designated in the macroscopic description. Margins include the proximal, distal, and 
radial  margins.  The  radial  margin  represents  the  adventitial  soft  tissue  margin  closest  to  the 
deepest  penetration  of  tumor.  For  all  segments  of  the  large  intestine  that  are  either 
incompletely encased (ascending colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, upper rectum) or not 
encased  (lower  rectum)  by  peritoneum,  the  radial  margin  is  created  by  blunt  dissection  of  the 
retroperitoneal or subperitoneal aspect, respectively, at operation. 
 
The  radial  margin  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  of  importance  in  relation  to  risk  of  local 
recurrence  after  surgical  resection  of  the  rectal  carcinomas.(43-45)  Multivariate  analysis  has 
suggested  that  tumor  involvement  of  the  radial  margin  is  the critical factor in predicting local 
recurrence in rectal cancer.(43-45) For this reason, routine assessment of the radial margin is 
suggested  in  all  colorectal  cancers,  and  measurement  of  the  distance  from  the  tumor  to  the 
radial  margin,  representing  the  “surgical  clearance”  around  the  tumor  is  suggested.(46)    For 
segments  of  the  colon  that  are  completely  encased  by  a  peritonealized  (serosal)  surface  (eg, 
transverse colon), the only radial margin is the mesenteric resection margin, and it is relevant 
when the point of deepest penetration of the tumor is on the mesenteric aspect of the colon and 

18 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

extends  to  this  margin  with  or  without  penetrating  the  serosal  surface.  For  those  tumors 
limited  to  an  antimesenteric  peritonealized  aspect  of  the  bowel,  the  radial  margin  is  not 
relevant. 
 
Because  of  its  association  with  local  recurrence,  involvement  of  the  radial  margin  has 
implications  for  adjuvant  therapy.  Whether  the  primary  tumor  is  T3  (without  serosal 
penetration)  or  T4b  (with  serosal  penetration),  resection  is  considered  complete  only  if  all 
surgical  margins  are  negative  including  the  radial  margin.  That  is,  whether  the  tumor  also 
penetrates  a  serosal  surface,  resection  is  considered  complete  if  the  resection  margins 
(proximal,  distal  and  radial)  do  not  contain  tumor.  If  a  radial  margin  is  involved  by  tumor, 
adjuvant therapy (eg, local radiation) may be appropriate. 
 
Sections  to  evaluate  the  proximal  and  distal  resections  margins  can  be  obtained  in  two 
orientations: 1) en face sections parallel to the margin or 2) longitudinal sections perpendicular 
to the margin. Depending on the closeness of the tumor to the margin, select the orientation(s) 
that best demonstrate the status of the margin. The distance from the tumor edge to the closest 
resection  margin(s)  should  be  measured.  In  cases  of  carcinoma  arising  in  a  background  of 
inflammatory  bowel  disease,  proximal  and  distal  resection  margins  should  be  evaluated  for 
dysplasia and active inflammation. 

 
 

19 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 
REFERENCES 

 

1. Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al. eds, AJCC Manual for Staging of Cancer, 5th 

ed, Lippincott Raven, Philadelphia, 1997. 

2. Fielding LP, Arsenault PA, Chapuis PH, Dent O, Gatright B, Hardcastle JD, Hermanek 
P,  Jass  JR,  Newland  RC.  Clinicopathological  staging  for  colorectal  cancer:  An 
International  Documentation  System  (IDS)  and  an  International  Comprehensive 
Terminology (ICAT). J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 1991;6:325-344. 

3.  Hermanek  P,  Henson  DE,  Hutter  RVP,  Sobin  LH.  TNM  Supplement.  New  York,  NY: 

Springer-Verlag NY Inc. 1993. 

4.  Jass  JR,  Sobin  LH.  Histological  Typing  of  Intestinal  Tumours:  World  Health 

Organization. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag NY Inc; 1989.  

5.  Hermanek  P,  Sobin  LH.  Colorectal  Carcinoma.  In:  Hermanek  P,  Gospodarowicz  MK, 
Henson  DE,  Hutter  RVP,  Sobin  LH,  eds.  Prognostic  Factors  in  Cancer.  New  York, 
NY: Springer-Verlag NY Inc; 1995. 

6.  Carriaga  MT,  Henson  DE.  The  histologic  grading  of  cancer.  Cancer  (Suppl) 

1995;75;406-421. 

7.  Sobin  LH,  Wittekind  C,  eds.  TNM  Classification  of  Malignant  Tumours:  International 

Union Against Cancer. 5th ed., New York, NY: Wiley , 1997. 

8.  Jass  JR,  Cuzick  J,  Bussey  HJR,  Morson  BC,  Northover  JMA,  Todd  IP.  The  grading  of 
rectal  cancer:  historical  perspectives  and  a  multivariate  analysis  of  447  cases. 
Histopathology 1986;10:437-439. 

9.  Chapuis  PH,  Dent  OF,  Fisher  R,  et  al.  A  multivariate  analysis  of  clinical  and 
pathological  variables  in  prognosis  after  resection  of  large  bowel  cancer.  Br  J  Surg 
1985;72:698-702. 

10.  Hermanek  P,  Guggenmoos-Holzmann  I,  Gall  FP.  Prognostic  factors  in  rectal 
carcinoma.  A  contribution  to  the  further  development  of  tumor  classification.  Dis 
Colon Rectum 1989;32:593-599. 

11.  Cooper  HS.  Surgical  pathology  of  endoscopically  removed  malignant  polyps  of  the 

colon and rectum. Am J Surg Pathol 1983;7:613-623. 

12.  Lipper  S,  Kahn  LB,  Ackerman  LV.  The  significance of  microscopic invasive cancer in 

endoscopically removed polyps of the large bowel. Cancer 1983;52:1691-1699. 

13.  Morson  BC,  Whiteway  JE,  Jones  EA,  Macrae  FA,  Williams  CB.  Histopathology  and 
prognosis  of  malignant  colorectal  polyps  treated  by  endoscopic  polypectomy.  Gut 
1984;25:437-444. 

14.  Haggitt  RC,  Glotzbach  RE,  Soffer  EE,  Wruble  LD.  Prognostic  factors  in  colorectal 
carcinomas  arising  in  adenomas:  implications  for  lesions  removed  by  endoscopic 
polypectomy. Gastroenterology 1985;89:328-336. 

15.  Cranley  JP,  Petras  RE,  Carey  WD,  Paradis  K,  Sivak  MV.  When  is  endoscopic 
polypectomy  adequate  therapy  for  colonic  polyps  containing  invasive  carcinoma? 
Gastroenterology 1986:91:419-427. 

20 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

16. Wilcox GM, Anderson PB, Colacchio TA. Early invasive carcinoma in colonic polyps. A 
review  of  the  literature  with  emphasis  on  the  assessment  of  the  risk of metastasis. 
Cancer 1986;57:160- 171 

17.  Richards  WO,  Webb  WA,  Morris  SJ,  et  al.  Patient  management  after  endoscopic 

removal of the cancerous colon adenoma. Ann Surg 1987:205:665-672. 

18. Wilcox GM, Beck JR. Early invasive cancer in adenomatous colonic polyps (malignant 
polyps). Evaluation of the therapeutic options by decision analysis. Gastroenterology 
1987;92:1159-1168. 

19.  Christie  JP.  Polypectomy  or  colectomy?  Management  of  106  consecutively 

encountered colorectal polyps. Amer Surg 1988;54:93-99. 

20.  Cooper  HS.  The  role  of  the  pathologist  in  the  management  of  patients  with 
endoscopically removed malignant colorectal polyps. Pathol Ann (Part 1) 1988;23:25-
43. 

21.  Coverlizza  S,  Risio  M,  Ferrari,  A,  Fenoglio-Preiser  CM,  Rossini  FP.  Colorectal 
adenomas  containing  invasive  carcinoma.  Pathologic  assessment  of  lymph  node 
metastatic potential. Cancer 1989;64:1937-1947. 

22. Muller S, Chesner IM, Egan MJ, et al. Significance of venous and lymphatic invasion 

in malignant polyps of the colon and rectum. Gut 1989;30:1385-1391. 

23.  Geraghty  JM,  Williams  CB,  Talbot  IC.  Malignant  colorectal  polyps:  venous  invasion 

and successful treatment by endoscopic polypectomy. Gut 1991;32:774-778. 

24. Nivatvongs S, Rojanasakul A, Reiman HM, et al. The risk of lymph nodes metastases 
in colorectal polyps with invasive adenocarcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:323-
328. 

25.  Kyzer  S,  Bégin  LR,  Gordon  PH,  Mitmaker  B.  The  care  of  patients  with  colorectal 

polyps that contain invasive adenocarcinoma. Cancer 1992;70:2044-2050. 

26.  Cooper  HS,  Deppisch  LM,  Gourley  WK,  et  al.  Endoscopically  removed  malignant 
colorectal  polyps:  clinicopathologic  correlations.  Gastroenterology  1995;108:1657-
1665. 

27. Volk EE, Goldblum JR, Petras RE, Carey WD, Fazio VW. Management and outcome of 
patients  with  invasive  carcinoma  arising  in  colorectal  polyps.  Gastroenterology 
1995;109:1801-1807. 

28. Knudsen JB,  Nilsson T, Sprechler M, Johansen A, Christensen N. Venous and nerve 
invasion  as  prognostic  factors  in  postoperative  survival  of  patients  with  resectable 
cancer of the rectum. Dis Colon Rectum 1983;26:613-617. 

29. Michelassi F, Block GE, Vannucci L, Montag A, Chappell R. A 5- to 21-year follow-up 
and  analysis  of  250  patients  with  rectal  adenocarcinoma.  Ann  Surg  1988;208:379-
387. 

30.  Minsky  BD,  Mies  C,  Rich  TA,  Recht  A.  Lymphatic  vessel  invasion  is  an  independent 
prognostic  factor  for  survival  in  colorectal  cancer.  Int  J  Radiat  Oncol  Biol  Phys 
1989;17:311-318. 

21 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

31. Talbot IC, Ritchie S, Leighton MH, Hughes AO, Bussey HJR, Morson BC. The clinical 

significance of invasion of veins in rectal cancer. Br J Surg 1980;67:439-442. 

32. Talbot IC, Ritchie S, Leighton M, Hughes AO, Bussey H, Morson BC. Invasion of veins 
by  carcinoma  of  the  rectum.  Method  of  detection,  histologic  features,  and 
significance. Histopathology 1981;5:141-163. 

33.  Harrison  JC,  Dean  PJ,  El-Zekey  F,  Vander  Zwaag  R.  From  Dukes  through  Jass: 

Pathological prognostic indicators in rectal cancer. Hum Pathol 1994;25:498-505. 

34. Graham DM, Appelman HD. Crohn's-like lymphoid reaction and colorectal carcinoma: 

A potential histologic prognosticator. Mod Pathol 1990;3:332-335. 

35.  Harrison  JC,  Dean  PJ,  El-Zeky  F,  Vander  Zwaag  R.  Impact  of  Crohn's-like  lymphoid 
reaction  on  staging  of  right-sided  colon  cancer:  Results  of  multivariate  analysis. 
Hum Pathol 1995;26:31-38.  

36.  Carlon  CA,  Fabris  G,  Arslan-Pagnini  C,  Pluchinotta  AM,  Chinelli  E,  Carniato  S. 
Prognostic  correlations  of  operable  carcinoma  of  the  rectum.  Dis  Colon  Rectum 
1985;28:47-50. 

37.  Jass  JR,  Atkin  WS,  Cuzick  J,  et  al.  The  grading  of  rectal  cancer:  historical 
perspectives and a multivariate  analysis of 447 cases. Histopathology 1986;10:437-
459. 

38.  Jass  JR,  Love  SB,  Northover  JMA.  A  new  prognostic  classification  of  rectal  cancer. 

Lancet 1987;1:1303-1306. 

39.  Shepherd  NA,  Saraga  EP,  Love  SB,  Jass  JR.  Prognostic  factors  in  colonic  cancer. 

Histopathology 1989;14:613-620. 

40.  Hase  K,  Shatney  C,  Johnson  D,  Trollope  M,  Vierra  M.  Prognostic  value  of  tumor 

"budding" in patients with colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:627-35. 

41.  Roncucci  L,  Fante  R,  Losi  L,  et  al.  Survival  for  colon  and  rectal  cancer  in  a 

population-based cancer registry. Eur J Cancer 1996;32A:295-302. 

42.  Ono  M,  Sakamoto  M,  Ino  Y,  et  al.  Cancer  cell  morphology  at  the  invasive  front  and 
expression  of  cell  adhesion-related  carbohydrate  in  the  primary  lesion  of  patients 
with colorectal carcinoma with liver metastasis. Cancer 1996;78:1179-1186. 

43. Quirke P, Durdy P, Dixon MF, Williams NS. Local recurrence of rectal adenocarcinoma 

due to inadequate surgical resection. Lancet 1986;2:996-999. 

44. Quirke P, Scott N. The pathologists role in the assessment of local recurrence in rectal 

carcinoma. Surg Oncol Clin N Amer 1992;3:1-17. 

45.  Adam  IJ,  Mohamdee  MO,  Martin  IG,  et  al.  Role  of  the  circumferential  margin 

involvement in the local recurrence of rectal cancer. Lancet 1994;344:707-711. 

46.  Chan  KW,  Boey  J,  Wong  SKC.  A  method  of  reporting  radial  invasion  and  surgical 

clearance of rectal carcinoma. Histopathology 1985;9:1319-1327. 

 

22 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 

Andreola S, Leo E, Belli F, et al. Manual dissection of adenocarcinoma of the lower third of the 
rectum for detection of lymph node metastases smaller than 5 mm. Cancer 1996;77:607-612. 
 
Bosman  FT.  Prognostic  value  of  pathological  characteristics  of  colorectal  cancer.  Eur  J  Cancer 
1995;31A:1216-1221. 
 
Böttger  TC,  Potratz  D,  Stöckle  M,  Wellek  S,  Klupp  J,  Juninger  T.  Prognostic  value  of  DNA 
analysis in colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1993;72:3579-3587. 
 
Chan KW, Boey J, Wong SKC. A method of reporting radial invasion and surgical clearance of 
rectal carcinoma. Histopathology 1985;9:1319-1327. 
 
Cohen AM, Tremiterra S, Cancela F, Thaler HT, Sigurdson ER. Prognosis of node-positive colon 
cancer. Cancer 1991;67:1859-1861. 
 
Crissman  JD,  Zarbo  RJ,  Ma  CK,  Visscher  DW.  Histologic  parameters  and  DNA  analysis  in 
colorectal adenocarcinomas. Pathol Ann 1989;24:103-147. 
 
Emdin  SO,  Stenling  R,  Roos  G.  Prognostic  value  of  DNA  content  in  colorectal  carcinoma. 
Cancer 1987;60:1282-1287. 
 
Fielding LP, Arsenault PA, Chapuis P, et al. Clinicopathological staging for colorectal cancer. J 
Gastroenterol Hepatol 1991;6:325-344.  
 
 Fielding LP, Phillips RKS, Fry JS, Hittinger R. Prediction of outcome after curative resection for 
large bowel cancer. Lancet 1986;2:904-907. 
 
Griffin  MR,  Bergstralh  EJ,  Coffey  RJ,  Beart  RW  Jr,  Melton  LJ  III.  Predictors  of  survival  after 
curative resection of carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Cancer 1987;60:2318-2324. 
 
Hermanek  P,  Giecil  J,  Dworak  O.  Two  programs  for  examination  of  regional  lymph  nodes  in 
colorectal carcinoma with regard to new pN classification. Pathol Res Pract 1989;185:867-873. 
 
Hutter RVP, Sobin LH. A universal staging system for cancer of the colon and rectum: Let there 
be light. Arch Pathol Lab Med 1986;110:367-368.  
 
Jass  JR,  Love  SB,  Northover  JMA.  A  new  prognostic:  classification  of  rectal  cancer.  Lancet 
1987;1:1303- 
1306. 
 
Krasna MJ, Flancbaum L, Cody RP, Shneibaum S, Ben Ari G. Vascular and neural invasion in 
colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 1988;61:1018-1023. 
 
Minksy  BD,  Mies  C,  Reclit  A,  Richt  A,  Chalfey  JT.  Resectable  adenocarcinoma  of  the 
rectosigmoid and rectum. I: Patterns of failure and survival. Cancer 1988;61:1408-1416. 
 
Minsky  BD,  Mies  C,  Recht  A,  Rich  TA,  Chaffey  JT.  Resectable  adenocarcinoma  of  the 
rectosigmoid and rectum. Cancer 1988;61:1417-1424. 
 
Minsky BD, Mies C, Rich TA, Recht A, Chaffey JT. Colloid carcinoma of the colon and rectum. 
Cancer 1987;60:3103-3112. 
 

23 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX III 

Morson  BC.  Histopathology  reporting  in  large  bowel  cancer  (Editorial).  BMJ  1981;283:1493-
1494 
 
Nacopoulou  L,  Azaris  P,  Paracharalampous  N,  Davaris  P.  Prognostic  significance  of  histologic 
host response in cancer of the large bowel. Cancer 1981;47:930-936. 
 
Patt  DJ,  Brynes  RK,  Vardiman  JW,  Coppleson  LW.  Mesocolic  lymph  node  histology  is  an 
important  prognostic  indicator  for  patients  with  carcinoma  of  the  sigmoid  colon:  An 
immunomorphologic study. Cancer 1975;35:1388-1396. 
 
Phillips  RKS,  Hittinger  R,  Blesovsky  L,  Fry  JS,  Fielding  LP.  Large  bowel  cancer:  Surgical 
pathology and its relationship to survival. Br J Surg 1984;71:604-610. 
 
Qizilbash AH. Pathologic studies in colorectal cancer. Pathol Ann 1982;17:1-46. 
 
Quirke P, Dixon MF, Durdey P, Williams NS. Local recurrence of rectal adenocarcinoma due to 
inadequate surgical resection. Lancet 1986;2:996-998. 
 
Shepherd  NA,  Saraga  EP,  Love  SB,  Jass  JR.  Prognostic  factors  in  colonic  cancer. 
Histopathology 1989;14:613-620. 
 
Steinberg  SM,  Barkin  IS,  Kaplan  RS,  Stablein  DM.  Prognostic  indicators  of  colon  tumors. 
Cancer 1986;57:1866-1870. 
 
Steinberg  SM,  Berwick  KW,  Stablein  DM.  Importance  of  tumor  pathology  and  morphology  in 
patients with surgically resected colon cancer. Cancer 1986;58:1340-1345. 
 
Tsakraklides  F,  Wanebo  HJ,  Sternberg  SS,  Stearns  M,  Good  RA.  Prognostic  evaluation  of 
regional lymph node morphology in colorectal cancer. Am J Surg 1975;129:174-180. 
 
Watt AG, Flouse AK. Colonic carcinoma. Cancer 1978;41:279-282.  
 
Wiggers T, Arends JW, Schutte B, Volovics L, Bosman FT. A multivariate analysis of pathologic 
prognostic indicators in large bowel cancer. Cancer 1988;61:386-395. 
 
Zarbo  RJ.  Interinstitutional  assessment  of  colorectal  carcinoma  surgical  pathology  report 
adequacy.  A  College  of  American  Pathologists  Q-Probes  study  of  practice  patterns  from  532 
laboratories  and  15,940 
reports.  Arch  Pathol  Lab  Med  1992;116:111:1113-1119.
 

 
 

24 of 23 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MOLECULAR MARKERS OF PROGNOSIS IN STAGE II COLON CARCINOMA 

 

 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

MOLECULAR MARKERS OF PROGNOSIS IN STAGE II COLON CARCINOMA 

 
 

Study Co-Investigators: 

University of California, San Francisco 
Department of Surgery, Box 0790 U372 
San Francisco, CA 94143 
Phone: (415) 476-4089 
 
Deaconess and Deaconess-Nashoba Hospital 
Lilian Kausmann Building 
3471 5th Ave., Ste. 300 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
Phone: (412) 692-2852 
 
University of Chicago 
Section of Hematology/Oncology 
5841 S. Maryland Avenue, MC 2115 
Chicago, IL 60637-1470 
Phone: (312) 702-4400 
 
University of Southern California 
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center 
1303 North Mission Road, CRL 204 
Los Angeles, CA 90033 
Phone: (213) 224-7788 
 

Cancer and Leukemia Group B 
Robert S. Warren, M.D. 
Noel Weidner, M.D. 
Alan P. Venook, M.D. 
 
 
J. Milburn Jessup, M.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
Lisa Yaremko, Ph.D. 
Richard Arenas, M.D. 
John Hart, M.D. 
 
 
 
Heinz-Josef Lenz, M.D. 
 
 
 
 
 
North Central Cancer Treatment Group 
Thomas E. Witzig, M.D. 
Richard M. Goldberg, M.D. 
Jerry A. Katzmann, Ph.D. 
 
 

Mayo Clinic 
Hematology and Internal Medicine 
200 First Street SW 
Rochester, MN  55905 
Phone: (507) 284-2511 

 

 

I. 

BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE 

In  1995,  an  estimated  160,000  new  cases  of  colorectal  cancer  were  diagnosed  in  the 
United  States  (1).  Surgery  is  the  primary  modality  of  management  for  these  tumors;  a 
resection  with  ‘curative  intent’  is  possible in about 85% of patients. Unfortunately,  more 
than  60,000  individuals  are  expected  to  die  of  the  disease,  usually  from  distant 
metastases  (2).  This  high  incidence  of  recurrent  disease  has  led  clinical  investigators  to 
recognize  that  the  ultimate  control  of  colorectal  cancer  will  require  both  local  and 
systemic therapy. Adjuvant therapies have, in fact, significantly improved the survival of 
patients with Stage III carcinoma of the colon (3,4) and Stage II or III cancer of the rectum 
(5,6).  Analyses  of  patients  with  Stage  II  colon  carcinoma,  however,  have  failed  to  find 
statistical benefit for those treated with adjuvant therapy (3,4). Ideally, only patients who 
have  occult  metastases  should  receive  adjuvant  therapy  because  the  drugs  are  toxic, 
expensive,  and  only  moderately  effective  against  advanced  disease.  Pathologic  stage 
criteria do not precisely define which patients have such metastases when the primary is 
removed: 70% - 80% of stage II (tumor through the bowel wall but not into regional lymph 
nodes)  patients  will  not  develop  metastases,  are  cured  by  surgery  alone,  and  will  not 
benefit from adjuvant therapy. The remaining patients will recur and die of their disease. 
Thus,  it  would  be  important  to  more  precisely  identify  those  patients  at  greatest risk for 
recurrence who would be most likely to benefit from adjuvant therapy. 

Page 1 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

The  current  criteria  used  to  evaluate  prognosis  are  stage-related  and  histologic 
parameters.  Stage-related  variables  measure  the  extent  of  disease  (depth  of  invasion  of 
bowel wall, presence  or absence of metastasis in regional nodes or distant sites, number 
of  involved  nodes).  Histologic  variables  assess  the  state  of  differentiation  of  a  neoplasm 
(grade), extramural vascular invasion and pre-operative serum carcinoembryonic antigen 
(CEA)  level  (7).  The  first  widely  used  staging  system  was  proposed  by  Dukes  in  1932  (8) 
and  assessed  invasion  of  the  bowel  wall  and  the  status  of  the  regional  lymph  nodes  by 
rectal  carcinomas.  Dukes  did  not  consider  grade-related  criteria  to  affect  outcome  as 
strongly as stage-related parameters did. Thus, the TNM staging system (9) and either the 
Gunderson-Sosin  (10)  or  the  Astler-Coller  (11)  modifications  of  the  Dukes  system  only 
assess invasion of the bowel wall and status of regional lymph nodes. 

These  staging  systems  create  categories  too  large  to  be  useful  prognosticators  for 
individual  patients  and  can  be  applied  only  after  pathologic  examination  of  the  resected 
primary  tumor  and  lymph  nodes.  This  prompted  investigators  to  include  histologic 
variables  in  a  staging  system  to  improve  prognostication.  However,  when  histologic 
variables were included with the number of involved lymph nodes and degree of invasion 
through  bowel  wall  in  a  Cox  proportional  hazards  regression  model  of  survival  in  447 
consecutive  rectal  carcinomas,  the  only  independent  histologic  variable  was  lymphocytic 
infiltrate  (7-12).  Several  other  studies  (13-16)  confirmed  that  stage-related,  but  not 
histologic  variables,  are  independently  associated  with  the  survival  of  either  colon  or 
rectal  carcinoma  patients.  In  addition,  within  each  stage,  it  has  been  difficult to identify 
clinically  useful  parameters  which  can  stratify  patients  according  to  their  risk  of 
recurrence.  This  has  led  various  investigators  to  examine  additional  genotypic  or 
phenotypic  characteristics  in  colon  carcinoma  which  may  be  of  prognostic  value.  These 
have  focused  on  markers  of  cell  proliferation  or  on  features  which  may  contribute  to 
metastatic  capacity  in  colon  cancer  such  as  ploidy  and  S  phase  fraction  (17-21), 
expression  of  proteases  or  their  receptors  (e.g.,  metalloproteinases  or  urokinase  and  the 
uPAR)  (22,23),  and  the  expression  of  plasma  membrane  glycoproteins  which  may 
contribute to cell adhesion (CD44, sialyl Lewis a) (24,25). Most of these reports are single 
marker  retrospective  or  small  prospective  investigations.  Interpretation  of  these  studies 
often  has  been  hampered  by  poor  quality  clinical  databases,  lack  of  standardization  or 
quality  control  of  the  laboratory  methodologies,  or  variability  of  statistical  methodologies 
(26).  As  pointed  out  recently  by  the  Colorectal  Cancer  Working  Group  of  the  College  of 
American  Pathologists,  the  findings  of  these  studies  have  not  been incorporated into the 
design  of  prospective  therapeutic  trials  (26).  The  strategy  we  have  taken  in  this 
companion  correlative  science  protocol  to  CALGB  9581  is  to  analyze  the  expression  of  a 
set  of  biological  properties  of  the  tumors  or  the  host’s  response  and  to  determine  their 
usefulness  either  individually  or  in  combination  as  markers  of  clinical  outcome  in 
patients  with  high-risk  node-negative  colon  carcinoma  (Stage  II;  MAC  B2).  Furthermore, 
the impact of these biological properties of the tumor on the host’s response to MoAb 17-
1A  will  also  be  evaluated.  These  potential  prognostic  markers  have  been  selected  based 
upon  strong  preliminary  retrospective  data  and  demonstrated  laboratory  expertise  of 
CALGB investigators. They fall into three broad categories: molecules which participate in 
cell  cycle  control  (thymidylate  synthase,  p53,  p21,  p27),  tumor  metastasis  (DCC,  VEGF 
and microvascular density) and cellular differentiation (sucrase-isomaltase). 

Page 2 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

II.  CELL CYCLE RELATED MARKERS: TS, P53, P21 AND P27 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

1. 

2. 

TS. Thymidylate synthase (TS) is an essential enzyme needed for DNA synthesis in S-
phase  of  the  cell  cycle  and  is  the  target  enzyme  of  5-fluorouracil  (5-FU),  the  most 
important chemotherapeutic agent in the treatment of colorectal cancer. The clinical 
importance of TS protein has been suggested by studies demonstrating that intrinsic 
levels  of  TS  correlate  with  resistance  to  5-FU  in  experimental  tumors  and  in  the 
clinical  setting  (27,28).  Studies  of  patients  with  colon  and  gastric  cancer  have 
indicated  that intratumoral TS gene  expression is a major determinant of resistance 
to  5-FU  (29-31).  Monoclonal  antibodies  to  human  TS  have  been  recently  developed 
that  have  the  sensitivity  and  specificity  to  detect  and  quantitate  TS  enzyme  in  the 
cytosol  from  human  cells  and  tumor  tissues  (32).  In  collaboration  with  Dr.  Patrick 
Johnston of the NCI-Navy Medical Oncology Branch, we were able to show that both 
TS protein and TS gene expression are significantly associated with response to 5-FU 
based  chemotherapy  (33).  A  recent  retrospective  study  by  Johnston  et  al.  in  249 
patients  with  rectal  carcinoma  has  indicated  that  TS  protein  expression  determined 
by  immunohistochemistry  may  be  a  powerful  prognosticator  of  disease  free  survival 
(DFS)  and  overall  survival  (34).  Moreover,  TS  expression  was  independent  of  Dukes’ 
stage  and  other  standard  clinico-pathological  criteria.  It  has  been  suggested  that 
quantitation of a chemo-therapeutic target such as TS may not only allow prediction 
of risk of recurrence but may help identify patients who would benefit from adjuvant 
chemotherapy within each Dukes’ stage (35). 

Understanding  the  role  of  TS  as  a  predictor  of  survival  and  fluoropyrimidine 
responsiveness  might  lead  to  improved  therapeutic  strategies  in  patients  with  colon 
cancer  (35).  Because  MoAb  17-1A  exerts  action  by  a  different  mechanism  than 
fluoropyrimidines  (i.e.,  not  TS  dependent),  high  TS  levels  may  not  be  prognostic  for 
responsiveness  to  antibody  therapy.  Preliminary  data  of  intratumoral  TS  protein 
levels  in  patients  with  stage  II  colon  cancer suggest that high TS protein  expression 
level is strongly associated with tumor recurrence, indicating that TS expression may 
be  an  independent  prognostic  factor  for  recurrence  and  clinical  outcome  in  patients 
with colon cancer. 

p53.  The  second  molecular  candidate  determinant  for  recurrence  and  survival  in 
colon  cancer  is  the  tumor  suppressor  gene  p53.  Mutations  in  p53  are  the  most 
common  genetic  abnormality  found  in  solid  tumors.  p53  protein  accumulation  is 
found  to  predict  early  recurrence  and  clinical  outcome  in  patients  with  non-small 
lung cancer (36,37), in node-negative breast cancer (38-40), and in carcinoma of the 
bladder  (41).  The  prognostic  value  of  p53  analysis  in  colorectal  cancer  is  less  clear. 
p53  has  been  analyzed  indirectly  by  the  demonstration  of  loss  of  heterozygosity  of 
chromosome 17p (42), and directly by mutational analysis using cycle sequencing or 
single  strand  conformation  polymorphism  determination  (43).  Since  the  half-life  of 
mutant p53 protein is prolonged, cells harboring mutant p53 may stain positively for 
p53  protein  by  immunohistochemical  techniques  while  cells  bearing  only  wild-type 
p53  are  negative  by  IHC.  Consequently,  some  investigators  have  used  p53 
immunopositivity  as  a  surrogate  for  p53  mutation  and  examined  the  relationship 
between p53 positivity by IHC and clinical outcome (44-53). These studies have been 
subject to certain criticisms due to: 1) the use of different monoclonal antibodies and 
polyclonal  antibodies  to  detect  the  p53  protein;  2)  the  variable  percentage  of 
immunoreactive  neoplastic  cells  used  as  a  cutoff  between  positive  and  negative 
tumors;  3)  different  scoring  of  the  immunocytochemical  results  according  to  the 
nuclear or cytoplasmatic compartmentalization  of the p53 protein immunoreactivity; 
and  4)  the  potential  instability  of  mutant  p53  protein  in  formalin-fixed,  paraffin-
embedded tissue or poor correlation of IHC positivity with p53 mutation (54). Several 
studies  have  shown  a  good  correlation  between  p53  abnormalities  and  survival 
(45,47-53), while other investigators have failed to identify a relationship between p53 

Page 3 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

3. 

4. 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

status  and  survival  in  colorectal  cancer  (44,46).  p53  status  might  also  predict 
treatment  efficacy  in  patients  receiving  adjuvant  chemotherapy  similar  to  what  has 
been  found  in  patients  with  advanced  colorectal  cancer  (55).  A  primary  goal  of  this 
project is to identify patients with stage II colon cancer at significantly higher risk of 
recurrence  and  poor  clinical  outcome  who  might  benefit  from  investigational 
therapies. 

p53  and  its relation to TS.  The  role  of  p53  in  cell  cycle  regulation  suggests  that  it 
might be a prime candidate in controlling TS expression. Our in vitro data indicate a 
possible  association  between  TS  expression  and  p53  status.  Transfection  of  wt  p53 
into  p53  null  HL  60  cells  lead  to  decreased  TS  gene  expression  levels  indicating  an 
association between p53 and TS (56). Our in vivo data demonstrated that tumors with 
mutant p53 had significantly higher TS gene expression than tumors with wt p53 in 
patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Furthermore, in patients with stage II colon 
cancer we found a significant correlation between high TS protein expression and p53 
nuclear overexpression (see Preliminary Studies - Section III). 

Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors p21/WAF1/CIP1 and p27. While the presence 
of p53 mutations can be inferred to a large extent by immunohistochemical analysis, 
to  date  no  easily  measurable  biochemical  parameter  has  been  identified  that  would 
be  indicative  of  p53  function.  However,  recently,  a  gene  has  been  identified, 
p21/WAF1/CIP1,  which  functions  as  a  cyclin-dependent  kinase  (CDK)  inhibitor  and 
is  thought  to  be  a  direct  mediator  of  p53  cell-cycle  regulatory  activity  and  p53-
mediated apoptosis (57,58). Transit of cells into S-phase of the cell cycle is regulated 
by  protein  kinases  known  as  CDK’s  whose  activity  is  promoted  by  cyclins  and 
inhibited by a family of proteins called cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKI) (59). 
The  CKI  p21  has  been  shown  to  be  induced  directly  by  wt  p53  in  vitro  but  its 
expression is lost when active p53 is absent (58,60). These findings suggest that p21 
levels  maybe  useful  as  an  indicator  of  p53  function  in  cells  and  may  be  a  link 
between  p53  status  and  TS  expression.  If  p21  expression  is  a  reflection  of  the  p53 
function, low or absent expression of p21 may indicate a lack of p53 transcriptional 
activity,  while  partial  expression  of  p21  should  indicate  some  retention  of  p53 
activity. p21 expression may not only help to identify p53 mutations which may have 
partial  wild-type activity but also to identify tumors with  false negative p53 staining 
due to deletion, non-sense and mispliced mutations. However, p21 may be regulated 
in  a  p53-independent  manner  through  activation  of  the  type  II  TGFb  receptor  (61). 
Consequently,  mutations  in  the  TGFb  RII  may  lead  to  diminished  p21  even  in  the 
presence of wild type p53. Similarly, preserved p21 expression may occur in the face 
of mutant p53 through this p53-independent pathway. 

Like  p21,  the  CKI  p27  binds  to  and  inactivates  cyclin/CDK  complexes,  thereby 
blocking progression through G1 into S phase (62). Mitogens permit this transition in 
part  by  down-regulating  p27  expression  (63).  The  clinical  relevance  of  p27  in 
colorectal  cancer  was  suggested  by  Loda,  et  al.  (64).  In  a  retrospective  series  of  68 
patients  with  Stage  II  colorectal  carcinoma,  weak  (1  -  50%  of  tumor  cells  express 
nuclear  p27)  and  strong  (>50%  of  tumor  cells  express  nuclear  p27)  expression  are 
associated  in  a  multivariate  analysis  with  a  six-  and  thirty-fold  reduction  in  death 
from cancer compared to patients whose tumors lack p27 expression (see Preliminary 
Studies - Section III). 

Page 4 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

5.  Markers Of Metastatic Potential: DCC and VEGF. The candidate tumor suppressor 
gene Deleted in Colon Cancer (DCC) was cloned on the basis of allelic deletions (LOH) 
on  18q in more than 70% of colorectal  cancers.  Its cDNA encodes a transmembrane 
1447 amino acid protein that is structurally similar to the NCAM family of molecules. 
It is normally found in relatively high concentration in the adult nervous system but 
is  virtually  undetectable  at  the  protein  level  in  most  other  adult  tissues.  Low  level 
DCC transcripts are detected rather ubiquitously in most adult and fetal tissues and 
cell lines. Allelic loss of 18q is seen in over 70% of colorectal cancers and only a few 
have  somatic  mutations  of  the  remaining  allele  implicating many other mechanisms 
of  genetic  inactivation.  More  recently,  LOH  at  18q  has  been  detected  in  a  variety  of 
tumors including breast (35%-70%), gastric (61%), prostate (45%), esophageal (24%), 
and    CNS  tumors  (64-69).  18q  LOH  data  from  colorectal  cancer  and  a  growing 
number of other malignancies lend support to the concept that DCC may function as 
a tumor suppressor gene (70). Microcell-mediated whole chromosome 18 transfer into 
colon  cancer  cell  lines  reversed  malignant  phenotype  (71);  however,  it  is  unclear 
whether  this  suppression  was  due  to  DCC  restoration  or  some  other  gene(s)  on 
chromosome 18. DCC constructs transfected into HPV-transformed human epithelial 
cells suppress their malignant phenotype (72) and antisense RNA to DCC transforms 
Rat 1  fibroblasts  indicating  that  loss  of  DCC  expression  may  be  important  in  the 
transformation of this cell type (73). 

cells 

lack  DCC 

It  has  been  suggested  that  DCC  also  plays  an  important  role  in  cellular 
differentiation.  Colorectal  tumors  that  have  lost  their  capacity  to  differentiate  into 
mucin-producing 
expression,  while  well  differentiated 
adenocarcinomas  retain  DCC  expression  (74).  Rat  pheochromocytoma  cells  (PC12) 
transfected  with  antisense  DCC  inhibit  neurite  outgrowth  and  NIH3T3  cells 
transfected with  DCC stimulate  neurite outgrowth in neighboring PC12 cells (75). In 
these  experiments,  it  appears  that  the  cytoplasmic  domain  of  DCC  is  crucial  for 
intracellular signaling but may also be important in suppression of tumorigenicity or 
function  in  a  dominant  negative  fashion.  The  chicken  homologue  to  human  DCC  is 
an epithelial adhesion molecule which is expressed  in cells involved in mesenchymal 
interactions.  Antibodies  raised  against  the  extracellular  portion  of  DCC  inhibits 
cluster  formation  of  DCC-expressing  PA317  fibroblast  cells.  Further,  in  vivo 
administration of DCC antibodies causes disaggregation of layered embryonic chicken 
skin epithelial cells (76,77). 

Clinical studies regarding DCC expression in colon cancer have been limited, in part 
due to lack of techniques developed to detect DCC protein in small amount of tissue 
or paraffin-embedded material. Iino et al. in 98 colorectal samples demonstrated that 
18q  LOH  was  significantly  correlated  with 
invasion  and  hepatic 
metastases.  DCC  protein  expression  was  not  evaluated  in  this  study  (78).  Jen  et  al. 
retrospectively  looked  at  69  stage  II  and  76  stage  III  colon  cancer  patients  for  18q 
LOH  and  concluded  that  18q  allelic  loss  was  a  strong  predictive  (hazard  ratio  for 
death,  2.46;  95%  CI  1.06-5.71;  P=0.036)  after  adjustment  for  all  other  evaluated 
factors  including  tumor  differentiation,  vascular  invasion,  and  TNM  stage.  DCC 
protein  expression  was  not  evaluated  in  this  study  (79)  (See  Preliminary  Data  - 
Section III) 

lymphatic 

Page 5 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Tumor  Angiogenesis  and  Vascular  Endothelial  Growth  Factor  Expression.  New 
blood vessel formation is considered a fundamental element in the capacity of tumors 
to grow beyond a few millimeters in greatest dimension (80). The ability of a neoplasm 
to induce angiogenesis appears to represent a balance between positive and negative 
regulatory  factors  (81).  Inhibition  of  tumor  endothelial  cell  proliferation  or  the 
inactivation  of  endothelial  mitogens  has  shown  promise  as  novel  anti-neoplastic 
strategies which are beginning to undergo clinical therapeutic trials in humans. The 
analysis  of  tumor  angiogenic  activity  in  patients  undergoing  potentially  curative 
resection was first shown by Weidner and co-workers to be an independent measure 
of  clinical  outcome  in  breast  cancer  (82).  Subsequent  studies  have  generally 
supported  the  prognostic  value  of  tumor  angiogenesis  in  both  node-negative  and 
node-positive breast cancer, as well as in cancers of the cervix, kidney, bladder, ovary 
and  stomach  (83-88).  A  variety  of  growth  factors  have  been  found  to  be  capable  of 
inducing endothelial cell proliferation, migration or tube formation in vitro, and to act 
as  direct  angiogenesis  factors  in  corneal  neovascularization  assays  (81).  Recent 
interest  has  focused  on  the  possible  contribution  of  vascular  endothelial  growth 
factor  (VEGF)  to  tumor  angiogenesis.  On  a  molar  basis  VEGF  is  the  most  potent 
known  endothelial  mitogen  and  is  widely  expressed  in  solid  tumors  (89-92).  In 
colorectal  cancer,  expression  of  VEGF  and  its  receptors  are  up-regulated  in 
comparison  to normal bowel and inhibition  of VEGF activity has a potent antitumor 
effect  in  animal  models  of  liver  metastasis  (93)  (See  Preliminary  Data  -  Section  III). 
Recent  retrospective  studies  have  indicated  that  measures  of  angiogenesis  may  be 
clinically useful as prognostic indicators in colorectal cancer as well (94,95), but this 
has not been a consistent observation (96). 

Tumor  Differentiation:  Sucrase-Isomaltase  and  Prognosis.  Changes 
in 
differentiation  may  provide  other  tumor  markers.  The  disaccharidase  sucrase-
isomaltase  (SI),  which  is  normally  expressed  in  adult  small  intestine  and  fetal  colon 
and  absent  in  normal  adult  colon,  is  upregulated  in  many  human  colorectal 
carcinomas  (97).  SI  is  first  expressed  in  class  II  polyps  with  moderate  dysplasia 
(97,98) as well as in dysplastic colonic mucosa in chronic active ulcerative colitis (99). 
During  neoplastic  transformation,  SI  accumulates  in  the  cytoplasm  rather  than  in 
the  plasma  membrane  (97).  Other  groups  have  recently  confirmed  our  findings  that 
human  colorectal  carcinomas  have  increased  expression  of  SI  (100).  Recent  data 
indicates  that  SI  expression  is  a  significant  prognostic  factor  in  a  multivariate 
analysis  of  the  survival  of  patients  with  stage  I  -  III  colorectal  carcinoma  (101)  (See 
Preliminary  Data  -  Section  III).  While  the  function  of  SI  in  carcinoma  is  not  known 
(102), we have found that expression of  SI is associated with mutation in p53 (103). 
Thus,  this  multivariate  analysis  suggests  that  SI  is  a  candidate  tumor marker  to  be 
tested in a prospective series of patients. 

DNA  Content  and  Cell  Proliferation  by  Flow  Cytometry.  Measurement  of  DNA 
content by flow cytometry has been performed in the United States for over ten years, 
and  is  a  widely  accepted  technique  that  can  be  performed  in  most  large  hospital 
laboratories.  There  are  several  reasons  to  examine  DNA  content  flow  cytometry  in 
patients with colon cancer. The majority of published studies suggest that DNA ploidy 
has significant prognostic value (104, 105), however, contradictory results have been 
obtained  following  use  of  a  wide  variety  of  assay  methods  (106).  As  a  result,  the 
overall  role  of  DNA  ploidy  in  prognosis  of  colorectal  cancer  is  controversial.  The  last 
study  of  DNA  flow  cytometry  was  performed  in  the  1980’s,  and  substantial 
methodological  advances  have  been  made  in  DNA  content  flow  cytometry  since  that 
time.  These  new  methods,  including  improved  software  models  to  compute  S-phase 
and allow for subtraction of debris, have produced better discrimination of aneuploid 
peaks and improved calculation of S-phase on the total histogram and the aneuploid 
population. These improved assessments of %S-phase and DNA ploidy must therefore 
be  confirmed  by  a  new  clinical  study,  as  well  as  correlated  with  other  prognostic 
markers for colorectal cancer. 

Page 6 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

III.  PRELIMINARY STUDIES 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

The group of co-investigators in the present protocol has generated significant preliminary 
data demonstrating associations between the proposed individual prognostic markers and 
outcome analyzed retrospectively in colon carcinoma. These studies in concert with those 
cited  in  Section  I  (above)  provide  support  for  a  broad  prospective  evaluation  of  the 
potential clinical utility of these molecular markers in Stage II colon cancer. 

1. 

TS  protein  levels  predict  for  recurrence  in  44  patients  with  stage  II  colon 
cancer. 

Patients: 45 consecutive, untreated patients with stage II colon cancer were operated 
on  between  June  1988  and  December  1993  at  LAC-USC  Medical  Center.  Clinical 
follow-up  was  available  for  44  patients  (98%)  with  a  median  follow-up  period  of  37 
months. Multivariate analysis was carried out to determine the importance of gender, 
race,  age,  tumor  grade,  and  tumor  site  in  tumor  recurrence.  Left  sided  tumors 
demonstrated  a  higher  recurrence  rate  than  right  sided  tumors  (p=0.013).  No  other 
clinical variable was statistically relevant. 

Methods:  TS  protein  expression 
in  the  primary  tumor  was  determined  by 
immunohistochemical  staining  using  the  monoclonal  antibody  TS  106  provided  by 
Dr. P. Johnston of the NCI-Navy Medical Oncology Branch. TS protein expression was 
quantitated  using  a  visual  grading  system  based  on  the  intensity  of  cytoplasmatic 
staining  (0-3)  and  on  whether  the  staining  pattern  is  focal  or  diffuse.  Cytoplasmatic 
staining of 0 or 1 was considered to be low TS staining and staining intensities of 2 or 
3 as high TS staining. 

Results:  Sixteen  of  the  44  patients  (36%)  showed  high  TS  staining,  eleven  of  the  16 
high  TS  expressing  tumors  developed  recurrence  (69%).  In  the  group  of  low  TS 
staining  tumors  only  7  tumors  out  of  28  recurred  (25%)  (p=0.0012,  logrank  test). 
These  data  indicate  that  the  TS  protein  levels  might  be  associated  with  tumor 
recurrence. The relative risk for patients with high TS expression in their tumors was 
4.17  to  develop  tumor  recurrence  compared  to  patients  with  low  TS  expression  in 
their tumors. The data are shown in Table 1. 

Table 1. 

Association between TS protein expression and recurrence in 44 patients with 

stage II colon cancer. 

 

Number of patients  

Number of patients 

with tumor 
recurrence 

Estimated chance 
of recurring at 3 

years*  

Tumors with high TS 
staining (> 2 ) 

Tumors  with  low  TS 
staining (< 1 ) 

16  

28  

11  

7  

71% 

28% 

p=0.0012 (logrank test)     * based on Kaplan Meier Estimates 
TS  protein expression  was determined by immunohistochemical staining and quantitated using a visual 
grading system. 

2. 

p53 nuclear overexpression predicts for recurrence in 44 patients with stage II 
colon cancer. 

Methods:  p53  nuclear  overexpression  was  determined  by  immunohistochemical 
staining using the monoclonal antibody D-07 in the same tumor tissue section which 
we used for TS staining. This monoclonal antibody was recently found to be the most 
sensitive  and  specific  antibody  for  detecting  p53  mutations  (107).  The  technique  is 
described  in  detail  in  Section  V  -  Methods.  Only  tumors  that  show  > 10%  nuclear 
reactivity were considered as having overexpression of p53. 

Page 7 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

Results: Eighteen patients (41%) showed nuclear p53 overexpression and 26 patients 
(59%)  showed  no  nuclear  staining.  Thirteen  of  the  18  p53  overexpressing  tumors 
(72%)  developed  recurrent  disease but only 5 of the 26 p53 negative stained tumors 
recurred (19%)( p=0.0003, logrank test). The results are summarized in Table 2. The 
relative  risk  for  recurrence  for  p53  overexpressing  tumors  was  5.37  compared  to 
tumors  without  p53  overexpression.  These  data  strengthen  the  role  of  p53  as  a 
possible predictor of tumor recurrence in patients with stage II colon cancer. 

Association between p53 overexpression and recurrence in 44 patients with 

stage II colon cancer. 

Table 2. 

 

Number of patients  

Number of patients 

with tumor 
recurrence 

Estimated chance of 
recurring at 3 years*  

Tumors 
nuclear overexpression 

with 

p53 

Tumors  with  no  p53 
nuclear overexpression 

18  

26  

13  

5 

70% 

23% 

p=0.0003 (logrank test)     * based on Kaplan Meier Estimates 
p53 status was determined by immunohistochemical staining.  

3. 

Association between p53 status and TS expression in colon cancer. 

Of the 13 tumors with high TS expression and p53 nuclear overexpression, 11 tumor 
had  recurrence  (85%)  with  a  relative  risk  of  5.96.  These  data  indicate  that  p53  and 
TS expression might be associated and not independent risk factors.  

Of the 16 tumors which demonstrated high TS protein expression, thirteen also had 
p53  overexpression  in  the  same  tumor  sections.  We  found  a  strong  association 
between  the  p53  nuclear  overexpression  and  the  cytoplasmatic  TS  staining 
(p<0.0001) (see Table 3). These data confirm earlier findings from our laboratory in 37 
patients with advanced colorectal cancer that mutant p53 was associated with higher 
TS  gene  expression  (p=0.035)(108).  In  these  tumors  p53  status  was  determined  by 
cDNA cycle sequencing and TS gene expression levels by quantitative RT-PCR. 

Table 3. 

Association between p53 nuclear expression and TS staining in tumors from 44 patients 

with stage II colon cancer. 

Patients with p53 

Patients with 

overexpressing 

tumors with no p53 

overexpression  

Number of patients 

 

Patients  high 
TS 
staining (> 2) tumors 

Patients  with  low  TS 
staining (< 1) tumors  

tumors 

13 (81%) 

3 (19%) 

5 (18%) 

23 (82%) 

16 

28 

p<0.0001 (Pearson's chi-square) 
p53 and TS protein expression were determined by immunohistochemical staining. 

Page 8 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

4. 

p53  predicts  for  response  to  5-FU/LV  in  37  patients  with  advanced  colorectal 
cancer. 

Our  in  vivo  data  (Dr.  Lenz’s  group)  demonstrate  the  predictive  value  of  p53  for 
response  to  chemotherapy  with  5-fluorouracil/leucovorin  (5-FU/LV)  in  patients with 
advanced  colorectal  cancer.  p53  gene  status  was  determined  in  37  patients  with 
advanced  colorectal  cancer  by  cDNA  cycle  sequencing.  To  be  considered  a  complete 
response tumor lesions had to become undetectable by CAT scan lasting at least one 
month.  A  partial  response  required  50%  decrease  in  the  sum  of  the  diameter  of  the 
measurable  lesions  without  growth  of  others. We found inactivated p53 in 25 out of 
37  tumors  (67%).  Twenty-one  of  these  25  patients  with  a  p53  mutation  in  their 
tumors  did  not  respond  to  5-FU/LV  (84%),  and  6  of  12  patients  with  wt  p53 
responded to the chemotherapy (50%). Overall, the p53 status and response to 5-FU-
based chemotherapy was associated: 6/12 (50%) of patients with wt p53 experienced 
a  response,  compared  to  4/25  (16%)  of  patients  with  mutant  p53  (p-value=  0.04) 
indicating  that  the  p53  status  might  be  a  major  determinant  of  therapy  efficacy  in 
human tumors. 

5. 

p27 expression predicts survival in Stage II colon cancer. 

Dr. Jessup’s group (Loda et al., 109) has found in a retrospective series of 65 patients 
with  stage  II  colorectal  carcinoma  that  weak  (1-50%  of  tumor  cells  express  nuclear 
p27) and strong (>50% of tumor cells express nuclear p27) expression are associated 
in  a  multivariate  analysis  with  a  six-  and  thirty-fold  reduction in death from cancer 
compared with patients whose tumors lack p27 expression. 

 

p27 EXPRESSION IN STAGE II 

CANCER

S
U
R
V
I
V
I
N
G

1.0

 

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

    p27  Total Fail
> 50% 
1  7
1-50%  41  17  41
8  89
Absent  9 

15 

5 

10 
Year

15 

20

 
 
 

Page 9 of 32 

Log-Rank P-value = 0.0002

 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

Table 4. 

Cox Analysis of 65 patients with stage II carcinoma:  The role of p27. 

 

 

Category 

Risk Ratio 

 

1.20 

 

1.08 

 

3.67 

 

1.77 

 

32.1 

 

12.4 

 

C.I. 

 

0.47-3.08 

 

0.35-3.33 

 

1.39-9.71 

 

0.39-8.12 

 

2.9-350.4 

 

1.4-106.0 

 
p    
 

0.70 

 

0.89 

 

0.009 

 

0.46 

 

0.004 

 

0.02 

 

Variable 

 

Gender 

 

Age 

 

Site 

 

 

F=0 

 

<74=0 

 

Rectum = 1, C = 0 

 

Grade 

P = 1, W/M = 0 

 

p27 

 

p27 

 

Absent=1, ≥50%+=0 

 

≥50%+=0, <50%+=1 

6. 

DCC immunohistochemistry and outcome in Stage II colon cancer. 

Drs.  Shibata  and  Summerhayes  in  Dr.  Jessup’s  group,  working  with  Dr.  E.  Fearon, 
have  developed  a  technique  for  directly  assessing  the  expression  of  the  DCC  gene 
product in fixed tissues. In a series of 132 colorectal cancer patients of whom 70 were 
stage  II,  it  was  found  that  lack  of  expression  is  associated  with  a  30%  increase  in 
recurrence compared with patients whose tumors express DCC (see below): 

Cox Analysis of 132 patients with stage II - III colorectal cancer 

 

Table 5. 

 

Variable 

 

Gender 

 

Age 

 

Site 

 

Grade 

 

Stage 

 

DCC 

 

 

 

Category 

Risk Ratio 

 

M = 1, F = 0 

 

≥65 = 0, <65 = 1 

 

Rectum = 0, Colon = 1 

 

P = 1, W/M = 0 

 

III = 1, II = 0 

 

Absent=1, + = 0 

 

1.28 

 

0.91 

 

0.87 

 

1.77 

 

3.11 

 

3.16 

 

C.I. 

 

0.72 - 2.28 

 

0.50 - 1.63 

 

0.48 - 1.58 

 

0.39 - 8.12 

 

1.70 - 5.71 

 

1.70 - 5.85 

 
p    
 

0.40 

 

0.74 

 

0.64 

 

0.46 

 

0.0002 

 

0.0003 

Page 10 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

DCC EXPRESSION IN STAGE II - III

BOWEL CANCER

S
U
R
V
I
V
I
N
G

1.0

 

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Stage & 
II, DCC+ 
II, DCC- 
III, DCC+ 
III, DCC- 

Total 

Failed

35 
35 
31 
31 

3
16
12
21

 

5 

10 

15 

20

Year

 

7. 

VEGF expression in colorectal cancer metastases. 

followed 

to  varying  degrees 

The  UCSF  group  has  examined  VEGF  gene  expression  by  Northern  analysis  in  30 
resected human liver metastases from colorectal cancer. Tumors uniformly expressed 
(93).  VEGF  protein  expression  by 
VEGF  mRNA  but 
immunohistochemical  assay 
the  same  general  pattern.  We  also 
demonstrated a marked up-regulation of VEGF receptors in these cancers by RNA in 
situ hybridization (93). VEGF gene expression in colon cancer cell lines was found to 
be  regulated  by  insulin-like  growth  factors,  either  alone  or  in  a  synergistic  fashion 
with  hypoxia,  suggesting  a  paracrine  action  of  hepatocyte-derived 
in 
neovascularization  of  liver  metastases  (110).  In  an  athymic  mouse  model  of  liver 
metastases, VEGF monoclonal antibody  administration led to a marked reduction in 
the  number  and  size  of  experimental  hepatic  tumors  (93).  While  these  tumors 
expressed  a number of potential angiogenic factors, including TGFa, angiogenin and 
interleukin-8,  neutralization  of  a  single  factor-VEGF-was  sufficient  to  inhibit  tumor 
growth. 

IGF 

Page 11 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

8.  Microvascular Density 

Dr.  Noel  Weidner  at  UCSF  has  extensive  experience  in  the  correlation  of 
microvascular density to clinical outcome in a variety of solid tumors (82,85,86,111-
114).  In  colorectal  cancer,  only  a  limited  number  of  studies  have  examined  the 
relationship  between  measures  of  tumor  angiogenesis  and  prognosis  and  no 
consensus  has  yet  emerged.  Two  studies  of  colon  cancer  and  one  in  rectal  cancer, 
employing  anti-von  Willebrand  factor  staining  of  tumor  vessels,  have  reported  a 
statistically  significant  association  between  microvascular  density  (MVD)  and  either 
risk  of  metastasis  or  survival  (94,95).  However,  Bossi  et  al.  could  demonstrate  no 
independent prognostic value to microvessel quantitation using anti-CD31 antibodies 
to stain tumor vessels (96). Tomisaki et al. recently found that anti-vWF quantitation 
that  MVD  was  associated  with  hepatic  metastasis  but  not  with  overall  survival  in  a 
heterogeneous  group  of  patients  with  Dukes  A,  B  or C cancers (115). We propose to 
undertake  the  first  prospective  analysis  of  tumor  angiogenesis  in  colon  cancer  by 
measuring both MVD and VEGF expression by immunohistochemistry. 

9. 

Sucrase-Isomaltase expression predicts outcome in colon carcinoma. 

Dr. Jessup’s group has recently reported that SI expression is a significant prognostic 
factor  in  a  multivariate  analysis  of  the  survival  of  163  patients  with  stage  I  -  III 
colorectal carcinoma operated upon at the New England Deaconess Hospital between 
1965 and 1977 where the other significant covariates are site of primary, presence of 
nodal metastases, T stage, and poor differentiation (109). For Stage II colon cancers, 
the  five  year  survival  in  patients  whose  tumor  was  SI  positive  was  67%  versus  97% 
for those whose tumor was SI negative (p=0.008). 

10.  DNA  ploidy  and  cell  kinetic  measurements  predict  tumor  recurrence  in  colon 

cancer. 

In  a  previous  study  by  Dr.  Witzig’s  group,  tumors  were  analyzed  from  694  patients 
with stage B2 and C colon cancer (104). Of these patients, the percentage of patients 
free  of  recurrence  at  5  years  for  diploid  and  nondiploid  patients  was  65%  and  49%, 
respectively (p<0.001). The approximate 5 year death rates for diploid and nondiploid 
patients  were  35%  and  47%,  respectively  (p<0.001).  For  273  patients  with  B2 
cancers,  an  unfavorable  tumor  cell  kinetic  profile  (defined  as  nondiploid  or  diploid 
with a high proliferation index) was associated with a decreased 5 year survival (70% 
vs 87%, p<0.001). 

These  markers  and  their  prognostic  value  will  be  assessed  in  both  treated  and 
untreated patients. 

Page 12 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

IV.  RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS 

1. 

Experimental Design 

We  propose  to  test  whether  the  expression  of  markers  in  primary  carcinomas  is 
associated with survival and response to therapy in an adjuvant immunotherapy trial 
in stage II primary colon carcinoma. Approximately 1994 patients with stage II colon 
cancer  will  be  randomized  to  receive  the  monoclonal  antibody  17-1A  or  observation 
following potentially curative surgery. The markers to be studied have been shown in 
individual  retrospective  trials  to  be  significantly  associated  with  overall  or  disease-
free  survival.  The  utility  of  these  markers  will  be  assessed  in  a  large  population  of 
node  negative  colon  carcinomas,  half  of  whom  will  only  receive  surgery  and  no 
further 
intratumoral  molecular  markers  by 
immunohistochemistry  and  compare  marker  expression  to  the  presence  of  standard 
clinical  and  pathological  factors.  Samples  will  be  coded  and  analyzed  independently 
by  two  pathologists  whose  scores  will  be  averaged  for  both  the  intracellular 
distribution and the frequency of cells that express markers. The same coding system 
will  be  used  to  assure  that  pathologic  staging  is  correct.  The  specimens  will  also  be 
evaluated  for  the  following  grade-related  variables:  grade  of  differentiation,  type  of 
tumor  border,  presence  of  mucin,  depth  of  bowel  wall  penetration  and  invasion  of 
lymphatics, as well as serum CEA level. In patients receiving MoAb 17-1A, the impact 
of marker level on clinical outcome will be assessed. 

therapy.  We  will  analyze 

2. 

Pathologic Assessment of Prospectively Accrued Tissues 

Tissues  for  clinical  diagnosis  will  be  fixed  in  formalin,  embedded  in  paraffin,  and 
processed  for  routine  staining  with  hematoxylin  and  eosin  by  the  Pathology 
Coordinating Laboratory of CALGB. We will request 1-2 blocks for each study subject 
from  the  primary  tumor.  We  will  also  request  a  block  containing  non-neoplastic 
tissue  (normal  colon  or  uninvolved  lymph  node)  to  be  archived  by  CALGB  in 
anticipation of additional marker studies which may require such tissue in the future 
(such  as  microsatellite  instability  determination).  Pathologic  staging  is  confirmed 
according  to  TNM  staging  (9).  Evaluation  of  tissues  for  state  of  differentiation, 
invasion  of  lymphatics,  and  type  of  borders  (expanding  or  infiltrative)  will  be 
performed independently of the marker analysis. After ensuring that sections contain 
predominantly  tumor  (>  70%  neoplastic)  cells,  the  number  of  slides  indicated  below 
will  be  sent  to  the  individual  co-investigators  for  marker  analysis.  We  anticipate 
sufficient  material  to  perform  all  the  analyses  described.  In  the  event  that  tissue 
availability  is  limited,  the  analyses  will  be  undertaken  under  the  following  priority 
scheme: TS, p53, DCC, p27, p21, SI, VEGF, MVD, DNA ploidy. 

Page 13 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

3. 

Specific Aim 1 

To  determine  whether  tissue-based  markers  (Thymidylate  synthase,  p53,  p21,  p27, 
VEGF,  MVD,  DCC,  SI,)  are  independent  covariates  in  a  multivariate  analysis  with 
histologic  and  standard  clinicopathologic  variables  in  patients  prospectively  accrued 
in  a  stage  II  colon  carcinoma  clinical  trial.  Analyses  will  be  stratified  by  treatment 
randomization.  These  markers  and  their  prognostic  value  will  be  assessed  in  both 
treated and untreated patients. 

•  To  determine  whether  the  level  of  intratumoral  TS  protein  expression  is 
associated  with  tumor  recurrence  and  survival  for  untreated  stage  II  colon 
cancer patients. 

Investigators: Heinz-Josef Lenz M.D. 

Strategy:  TS  protein  expression  will  be  determined  by  immunohistochemical 
staining  using  the  monoclonal  antibody  TS  106 provided by Dr. P. Johnston. TS 
protein 
immunohistochemical  staining  and 
quantitated  using  a  visual  grading  system  independently  by  two  independent 
reviewers without knowledge of the clinical outcome. 

level  will  be  determined  by 

Anticipated  results:  This  portion  of  the  study  will  establish  if  intratumoral  TS 
expression  will  independently  predict  tumor  recurrence  and  survival  in  patients 
with stage II colon cancer. We expect that patients with high TS expression have 
a higher risk of developing tumor recurrence and have a poorer clinical outcome. 
These patients might benefit from more aggressive adjuvant therapy and intense 
medical follow up. 

•  To  determine  whether  TS  and  p53  expression  are  independent  or 
codeterminant  predictors  for  recurrence  and  survival  in  stage  II  colon 
cancer. 

Investigators: Heinz-Josef Lenz, M.D. 

Strategy:    We  will  investigate  p53  nuclear  overexpression  in  tumor  specimens 
from patients with stage II colon cancer. The functional status of the p53 protein 
is  routinely  determined  by  IHC  staining  of  tissue  sections  using  mAb  DO-7 
(NovaCastra). High expression is taken as evidence of a mutated gene because the 
mutated  p53  generally  is  more  stable  to  degradation  and  thus  accumulates  to 
higher levels than the wt p53, which is practically undetectable by IHC (63). The 
p53 staining will be independently evaluated two by reviewers without knowledge 
of the clinical outcome. 

Anticipated  results:  This  portion  of  the  study  will  establish  if  the  p53  nuclear 
overexpression  will  be  predictive  for  tumor  recurrence  and  survival.  We  expect 
that patients with p53 nuclear overexpression in their tumors have a higher risk 
of  developing  tumor  recurrence  and  have  a  poor  clinical  outcome.  Patients  with 
no p53 nuclear expression are expected to have less recurrence and good clinical 
outcome.  Furthermore,  we  expect  that  tumors  with  p53  nuclear  overexpression 
will  have  higher  TS  expression;  however,  some  tumors  with  no  p53  nuclear 
staining will have high TS staining. Patients with wt p53 and low TS expression in 
their tumors will have the lowest risk of tumor recurrence. 

Page 14 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

•  To  determine  whether  expression  of  the  cyclin-dependent  kinase  inhibitors 
p21 and p27 are independent determinants of tumor recurrence and survival 
in stage II colon cancer. 

Investigators: Heinz-Josef Lenz, M.D. [p21], and J. Milburn Jessup, M.D. [p27] 

Strategy:    p21  and  p27  expression  will  be  analyzed  by  immunohistochemistry 
using mAb’s from Santa Cruz Antibodies. 

Anticipated Results: Patients with tumors expressing high levels of p21 or p27 will 
be  less  likely  to  recur  and  will  experience  better  overall  survival  in  comparison 
with  those  with  low  p21  or  p27.  We  anticipate  a  significant  correlation  between 
low  p21  and  positive  immunohistochemistry  for  p53  (a  presumed  mutant 
genotype). 

•  To  determine  whether  DCC  expression  is  an  independent  determinant  of 

tumor recurrence and survival in stage II colon cancer. 

Investigators: Sridhar Mani, M.D., et al. 

Strategy:  DCC  expression  will  be  tested  by  two  methods:  immunohistochemical 
analysis  of  DCC  protein  using  mAb  15041A  (Pharmingen)  (3  slides)  and  loss  of 
heterozygosity  for  chromosome  18q  by  PCR  techniques  using  microsatellite 
markers  spanning  the  DCC  locus  on  18q.  For  informative  cases,  LOH  will  be 
compared with loss of DCC staining by ANOVA; however, both LOH data and IHC 
data will be analyzed independently as predictors of tumor recurrence and patient 
survival. 

Anticipated  Results:  We  expect  that  patients  with  cancers  which  do  not  stain 
positively  for  DCC  or  which  demonstrate  LOH  at  18q  will  have  a  higher 
recurrence  rate  and  poorer  overall  survival.  We  also  expect  a  strong  correlation 
between  LOH  and  DCC  immunohistochemistry,  permitting  the  application  of  the 
technically less complex IHC method to be adopted for routine clinical practice. 

•  To  determine  whether  the  degree  of  tumor  angiogenesis  as  assessed  by 
microvascular  density  or  VEGF  protein  expression  is  an  independent 
determinant of tumor recurrence and survival in stage II colon cancer. 

Investigator: Robert Warren, M.D., et al. 

Strategy:  MVD  will  be  determined  in  the  leading  edge  of  the  tumor  in  an  area  of 
apparent  highest  vessel  density  following  anti-von  Willebrand  factor  staining 
(Dako).  VEGF  protein  will  be  estimated  by  immunohistochemistry  polyclonal 
antisera directed against VEGF 165 (Santa Cruz Antibodies). 

lower  overall  survival.  Based  upon 

Anticipated Results: We expect that patients with tumors with a high microvessel 
density  or  high  VEGF  protein  expression  will  have  a  higher  risk  of  tumor 
recurrence  and 
the  results  VEGF 
neutralization studies in animals (93), we expect that in colon cancer VEGF acts 
as the predominant tumor angiogenesis factor. Consequently, we expect a strong 
correlation  between  MVD  and  VEGF  protein  immunohistochemistry.  Because 
wild-type  p53  has  been  shown  to  up-regulate  the  expression  of  angiogenic 
inhibitors  and  down-regulate  the  expression  of  angiogenic  stimulators,  we  will 
test  for  an  association  between  p53  over-expression  by  immunohistochemistry 
and both microvascular density and VEGF expression in these cancers. 

Page 15 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

•  To  determine  whether  the  expression  of  sucrase-isomaltase 

is  an 
independent determinant of tumor recurrence and survival in stage II colon 
cancer. 

Investigator: J. Milburn Jessup, M.D. 

Strategy:  The level of expression of the differentiation marker SI will be estimated 
by  immunohistochemistry  using  a  specific  polyclonal  rabbit  antibody  as 
previously described (101). 

Anticipated  Results:  We  expect  that  patients  whose  cancers  express  SI  will  have 
higher risk of tumor recurrence and lower overall survival. We also anticipate an 
association  between  up-regulation  of  SI  expression  and  p53  mutation  as 
estimated by p53 nuclear immunohistochemical staining. 

•  To  determine  whether  DNA  ploidy  and  cell  proliferation  are  prognostic  of 

tumor recurrence and overall survival in stage II colon cancer. 

Investigator: Thomas Witzig, et al. 

Strategy: Determinations of cell proliferation by %S-phase and DNA content (DNA 
diploid,  tetraploid,  or  aneuploid)  will  be  performed  on  primary  tumors.  The 
coefficient of  variation of the G0G1  peak  will be determined, and for aneuploid or 
tetraploid  tumors,  a  DNA  index,  defined  as  DI  =  aneuploid  peak  change  #  ‚  
diploid peak channel #, will be calculated. Cell proliferation measurements will be 
calculated with and without debris subtraction. 

Anticipated  Results:  We  expect  that  patients  with  aneuploid  or  high  S-phase 
fraction  tumors  will  exhibit  higher  rates  of  recurrence  and  a  lower  overall 
survival. We also expect a strong correlation with other cell cycle specific markers 
such as p53 and p27. 

V.  METHODS 

Each marker analysis will be performed in a coded manner independently of the standard 
histopathologic  assessment  by  two  investigators  at  each  participating  site.  Marker 
expression  will  be  evaluated  for  intensity  of  staining  (weak,  moderate,  or  strong)  and 
percent of cells positive, and will be recorded as continuous variables. The values will also 
be  assigned  to  ranges  (0,  <10,  10-50,  50-75,  or  >75%  percent  positive).  The  data  will  be 
converted to high or low, positive or negative, defined as follows (based upon preliminary 
studies sited in sections II and III, above): TS, high=mod. or strong staining in >25%; p53, 
p21, positive=mod. or strong nuclear staining in >10%; p27, high=mod. or strong nuclear 
staining  in  >50%;  VEGF,  high=mod.  or  strong  in  >50%;  SI,  positive=mod.  or  strong  in 
>1%; DCC, positive=mod. or strong in >25%; MVD, high=greater than 28 vessels per 100X 
field. All IHC markers will thus have a binomial outcome. 

A.  Immunohistochemistry  will  be  performed  on  deparaffinized,  rehydrated  4-6  micron 
sections  of  formalin-fixed  tissue.  Sections  from  positive  and  negative  control  tumors 
(which have been analyzed previously for either DCC, p53, p21, p27, TS, SI, or VEGF 
and found to be strongly positive or  completely negative) and controls in the absence 
of  primary  antibody  will  be  utilized  routinely.  In  certain  cases  (VEGF,  p53,  DCC), 
microwave  antigen  retrieval  methods  will  be  used.  Details  of  the  methods  for  TS,  SI, 
vWF,  and  VEGF  staining  have  been  published  (32,86,101).  Methods  for  analysis  of 
DCC, p21, p53 and p27 are given below. 

Page 16 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

B.  DCC  Immunohistochemistry:  Three  5-micron  sections  of  each  case  will  be  mounted 
onto  superfrost  plus  slides  (Fisher  Scientific,  Pittsburgh,  PA)  baked  at  60  degrees 
centigrade  for  1  hour,  cleared  in  xylene,  and  hydrated  through  a  descending  alcohol 
series to distilled water. For microwave antigen retrieval, the hydrated tissue sections 
will  be  placed  in  a  coplin  jar  containing  0.01M  Citrate  buffer,  pH  7.0  inside  a 
Samsung  1.5  cubic  feet,  900  watt  microwave.  The  tissue  sections  will  be  heated  for 
two minutes  on high,  followed by 13 minutes at 20% power. The heated sections will 
be  allowed  to  cool  for  15  minutes  and  washed  in  running  water.  After  retrieval, 
endogenous activity is blocked by treating the sections with 3% Hydrogen Peroxide in 
Methanol  for  2  minutes.  Two  tissue  sections  from  each  case  will  then  be  incubated 
overnight at 4°C at a titer of 1:50 for DCC immunostaining using a mouse monoclonal 
antibody  generated  against  the  intracellular  domain  of  DCC  (15041A,  Pharmingen, 
San  Diego,  CA).  One  slide  from  each  case  will  be  treated  in  a  similar  fashion  using 
normal  serum 
(Ventana  Medical  Systems,  Tucson,  AZ).  The 
immunohistochemical staining will be performed on a Ventana GenII system (Ventana 
Medical  Systems).  The  Ventana  GenII  utilizes  an  indirect  strepavidin  biotin  system 
conjugated  with  horseradish  peroxidase  for  detecting  the  immunocomplex  and  a 
Diaminobenzidine  as  substrate  for  localization.  The  Ventana  GenII  uses  a  cartridge 
delivered  avidin/biotin  blocking  kit  to  block  endogenous  biotin.  The  immunostained 
sections  will  be  counterstained  with  hematoxilyn,  dehydrated  through  an  ascending 
alcohol  series,  cleared  and  coverslipped.  A  positive  reaction  is  indicated  by  the 
accumulation of a brown reaction product within the cytoplasm of the cell. 

immunoglobulin 

C.  p53  and  p21  Immunohistochemistry:  The  tumor  section  will  be  cut  in  consecutive 
sections 5um thick. The sections will be deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a 
series  of  graded  alcohols.  The  sections  will  be  treated  with  0.3%  hydrogen  peroxide 
solution  to  exhaust  endogenous  peroxidase  activity.  After  microwave  treatment,  the 
sections  will  be  preincubated  in  1%  bovine  serum  albumin  in  phosphate-buffered 
saline,  and  monoclonal  antibodies  will  be  applied  to  the  sections:  D-07  (Dako;  code 
M7001), which reacts with wt type and mutant forms of human p53 protein, dilution 
1:50,  or  a  mouse  monoclonal  antibody  (Pharmingen  15441A)  which  reacts  with  the 
p21 protein at a dilution of 1:50. Biotinylated rabbit anti-mouse antibody (DAKO; code 
E354) will be used as secondary antibody, and the immunoreaction will be visualized 
by avidin-biotin complex. After a final rinse in PBS, the tissues will be incubated with 
diaminobenzidine  DAB  substrate  (0.02%  DAB,  0.005%  hydrogen  peroxidase)  for  15 
minutes and then will be counterstained in hematoxylin 100% (GILL 11 formula) and 
mounted  with  glass  coverslips  using  permount.  Staining  which  affected  only  cell 
nuclei will be absent when the primary antibody was omitted. A positive and negative 
control (tumors with known p53 status) will be included in each batch of staining. The 
extent  of  the  nuclear  reactivity  will  be  classified:  -:  no  reactivity;  +/-:  few  focally 
positive  cells;  +: heterogeneous  nuclear  reactivity  (10-50%  tumor  cells).  Only  tumors 
that  show  >  10%  nuclear  reactivity  will  be  considered  as  demonstrating  p53 
alterations  and  tumors  with  >10%  nuclear  expression  of  WAF1/CIP1  will  be 
considered as positive expressions. 

D.  p27  Immunohistochemistry:  Immunoperoxidase  staining  using  rabbit  polyclonal 
antisera  (109)  will  be  done  by  a  standard  3-step  technique  using  swine  anti-rabbit 
immunoglobulin  as  the  bridging  antisera  and  peroxidase-anti-peroxidase  (PAP) 
followed  by  antigen  localization  with  diaminobenzidene  (DAB).  Slides  will  be 
counterstained with hematoxylin or methyl green. 

E.  LOH analysis for 18q will be measured as follows: Six (6) 10-micron thick sections per 
patient  will  be  cut  from  formalin-fixed  paraffin-embedded  tissues  (also  10-micron 
thick  x  on  polylysine  coated  slides,  for  IH  studies).  One  slide  will  be  stained  with 
hematoxylin/eosin  for  histopathological  examination.  The  slides  will  be  stained  with 
hematoxylin and eosin, dehydrated in graded ethanol, and then dried without a cover 
glass.  Regions  containing  at  least  70  percent  neoplastic  cells  will  be  inked  with  a 
black  marker  (Sharpie,  Sanford  Corp.,  Bellwood,  IL)  under  a  dissection  microscope. 
The black marking ink will increase the density of the tissue and keep it at the bottom 

Page 17 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

of  the  tube  after  centrifugation.  Tissues  from  2  to  6  slides,  each  containing  a 
blackened region of tumor 0.2 to 1 cm2 in area, will be scraped off with a razor blade 
and transferred to a 1.5 ml Microfuge tube. Non-neoplastic tissue from the same slide 
or from sections of adjacent normal colon will then be marked and placed in another 
Microfuge tube. The collected tissue samples will be deparaffinized in 400 ml of xylene 
for  15  minutes  and  pelleted  by  centrifugation  at  10,000  x  g  for  2  minutes.  After  the 
xylene  is  removed  by  pipette,  the  tissues  will  be  heated  at  58°C  for  15  minutes  to 
remove  the  remaining  xylene  and  incubated  overnight  at  58°C  in  a  buffer containing 
0.5M  TRIS  (pH  8.9),  210  mM  EDTA,  10 mM sodium  chloride, 0.5 mg of proteinase K 
per  milliliter,  and  1  percent  sodium  dodecyl  sulfate.  The  samples  will  be  boiled  in  a 
water bath for 10 minutes at 100°C, cooled to room temperature, and then extracted 
twice  with  an  equal  volume  of  phenol  and  chloroform,  as  previously  described.  DNA 
will  be  precipitated  with  ethanol  and  dissolved  in  30  ml  of  buffer  containing  3  mM 
TRIS (pH 7.5) and 0.3 mM EDTA. 

  Oligonucleotide  primers  for  microsatellite  markers  from  the  long  arm  of  chromosome 
18  will  be  designed  on  the  basis  of  published  sequences.  The  following  dinucleotide-
repeat  markers  and  primers  will  be  used  in  the  prospective  study:  D18S55, 
5'GGGAAGTCAAATGCAAAATC3'  and  5'AGCTTCTGAGTAATCTTATGCTGTG3;  S18S58, 
5'GCTCCCGGCTGGTTTT3' 
and 
5'GCAGGAAATCGCAGGAACTT3'; 
5'ATATTTTGAAACTCAGGAGCAT3'; 
D18S64,  5'AACTAGAGACAGGCAGAA3'  and  5'ATCAGGAAATCGGCACTG3';  and 
D18S69, 5'CTCTTTCTCTGACTCTGACC3' and  5'GACTTTCTAAGTTCTTGCCAG3'   

5'GCAGGAAATCGCAGGAACTT3' 

and 

 D18S61,  

 

PCR-based  dinucleotide-repeat  assays  will  be  carried  out  in  96-well  plates  for  30 
cycles;  each  cycle  will be carried out at  95°C for 30 seconds, 50°C  for 1 minute, and 
70°C for 1 minute, with primers end-labeled with P-labeled ATP to a specific activity of 
more  than  108  cpm  per  microgram  of  DNA and under the PCR conditions previously 
described.  Two  volumes  of  stop  buffer  (95  percent  formamide,  20  mM  sodium 
hydroxide,  and  0.05  percent  bromophenol  blue  and  xylene  cyanate)  will  be  added  at 
the  end  of  the  amplification,  and  the  samples  will  be  loaded  onto  7  percent 
polyacrylamide gels containing 32 percent formamide and 5.6 M urea. 

  Determination of Chromosome 18q Status. We will define chromosome 18q loss as the 
complete or partial loss of the long arm of chromosome 18. Loss of a chromosome 18q 
allele in a tumor will be considered to be present when the PCR assay of adjacent non-
neoplastic tissue showed heterozygosity of the microsatellite markers on the long arm 
of  chromosome  18,  and  the  relative  intensity  of  the  two  alleles  in  the  tumor  DNA 
differed  from  the  relative  intensity  in  the  non-neoplastic  tissue  DNA  by a factor of at 
least  1.5.  When  the  loss  of  the  allele  was  not  obvious  on  visual  inspection,  the 
intensities  of  the  bands  were  quantitated  with  a  PhosphorImager  (Molecular 
Dynamics, Sunnyvale, Calif). 

 

In the study of Jen et al. (79), two dinucleotide-repeat markers from chromosome 18q 
(D18S61  and  D18S58)  were  sufficient  to  determine  the  status  of  the  chromosome  in 
110  of  the  135  paraffin  embedded  tumor specimens (81 percent). Additional markers 
(D18S69,  D18S64,  and  D18S55)  were  required  only  when  no heterozygosity in either 
D18S61 or D18S58 was present in the non-neoplastic tissue, or when atypical bands 
indicating a potential RER phenotype were observed in either marker. 

Page 18 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

F.  Flow Cytometry will be performed by analysis of a minimum of 10,000 tumor cells on 
an  Ortho  Cytron  Flow  cytometer.  Data  will  be  stored  on  optical  discs  and  analyzed 
using Modfit software. Each histogram will be reviewed by Dr. Witzig or Dr. Katzmann 
and  assigned  a  DNA  ploidy  category:  DNA  diploid,  tetraploid,  or  aneuploid.  DNA 
tetraploid tumors will be defined as tumors with > 13% cells in the G2M peak, a DNA 
index of 1.9-2.1, and a visible 8c peak on the side scatter/DNA content dot-plot. The 
cell  proliferation  parameters  will  be  analyzed  using  a single-cut debris and aggregate 
subtraction  program  and  a  rectangular  model  to  re-calculate  the  %S  and  %G2M 
phases of the cell cycle. 

 

The  following  parameters  from  the  DNA  histogram  will  be  entered  into  the  statistical 
database: 1) coefficient of variation (CV) of the G0G1 peak; 2) DNA ploidy classification: 
DNA  diploid,  tetraploid,  or  aneuploid;  3)  DNA  index  (DI)  for  aneuploid/tetraploid 
tumors;  4)  %S  and  %G2M  for  diploid  histograms;  5)  total  %S  and  total  %G2M, 
aneuploid/tetraploid  %S,  and  aneuploid/tetraploid  %G2M 
for  aneuploid  and 
tetraploid histograms; 6) % background aggregates and debris (%BAD); and 7) % cells 
in the aneuploid/tetraploid peak. 

VI. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

1. 

Assessment of Inter-rater agreement 

Raters will independently qualify marker expression according to a well-defined scale 
containing  K  levels  describing  the  results  for  each  marker.  There  will  be  two  raters 
for  each  marker.  A  25%  random  sample  will  be  taken  from  the  first  200  tissue 
samples  in  order  to  estimate  inter-rater  agreement.  A  kappa  measure  of  agreement 
proposed by Kraemer will be used to estimate the agreement between raters for each 
marker.  The  jack-knife  method  will  be  used  to  estimate  the  agreement  measure,  k, 
and  its  variance.  An  approximate  lower  confidence  bound  for  k  without  the 
assumption  of  no  agreement  can  be  obtained  using  this  method.  [Kraemer,  HC. 
(1980) "Extension of the Kappa Coefficient," Biometrics 36, 207-216]. (116) Thus, the 
existence of moderate to strong agreement can be determined. With this sample size, 
i.e.,  50  measurements,  an  agreement  of  0.5  between  raters  can  be  detected  with 
approximately  80%  power.  If  agreement  is  deemed  unacceptable  we  will  institute 
further training and continue to monitor agreement in the next 200 samples. 

2. 

Primary Objectives 

Eighteen  hypotheses  will  be  tested  using  the  proportional  hazards  model.  The 
relationship between each of nine markers, TS, p53, p21, p27,  VEGF, MVD, DCC, SI, 
DNA ploidy and time to recurrence and survival will be assessed controlling for other 
predictive  baseline  characteristics.  The  familywise  error  rate  will  be  controlled  for 
independently for each outcome. 

3. 

Survival Analysis Methodology 

The  Cox  proportional  hazards  model  (129)  will  be  used  to  determine  the  association 
between each marker (TS, p53, p21, p27, VEGF, MVD, DCC, SI, DNA ploidy) and time 
to recurrence and survival controlling for other baseline factors such as age, gender, 
treatment,  primary  tumor  site,  degree  of  differentiation,  lymphatic  invasion,  blood 
vessel  invasion  and  microvessel  counts.  Time  to  recurrence  will  be  measured  from 
time of  resection. Preliminary data suggests that very large differences exist in time 
to recurrence with respect to the presence or absence of some markers (Specifically, 
TS,  p53,  p27,  DCC,  SI;  see  III.  Preliminary  Studies.).  For  example,  the  estimated 
probability of a recurrence at 3 years was .71 for patients who had tumors with high 
TS  staining  and  .28  for  patients  who  had  tumors  with  low  TS  staining.  (See  III. 
Preliminary  Studies)    Assuming  that  50%  of  patients  (1100  patients;  550  per  arm) 
will  have  evaluable  specimens  and  36%  (396)  of  these  will  exhibit  low  TS  staining, 

Page 19 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

there  is  approximately  99%  power  to  detect  a  difference  in  time  to  recurrence  at  3 
years between .35 in the group with low TS staining and .50 in the group with high 
TS  staining  using  a  2-sided  test  and  testing  at  a=0.006.  More  conservatively,  this 
power  is  89%  if  only  a  third  of  specimens  are  analyzed.  It  is  anticipated  that  with 
expected differences of this magnitude or greater and the large sample size power will 
be >= 95% to test hypotheses regarding time to recurrence.  

Power may be lower for the survival outcome since survival rates are generally high. 
However, in a retrospective series of 65 patients with stage II colorectal carcinoma a 
large difference in median survival was observed among patients who did not express; 
moderately  expressed  and  highly  expressed  p27.  The  estimated  median  survival 
(Kaplan-Meier curve) was approximately 2 years in the group with no p27 expression, 
approximately  12  years  in  the  group  with  1-50%  of  tumor  cells  expressing  p27  and 
not  reached  in  the  group  with  >50%  tumor  cells  expressing  p27.  Fourteen  percent 
(14%), 63% and 23% of patients were in each group, respectively. (See III. Preliminary 
Studies)  Again,  assume  that  specimens  will  be  available  in  50%  of patients i.e., 550 
patients  per  arm  will  have  evaluable  specimens.  If  we  focus  the  comparison  on  the 
two  groups  for  which  median  estimates  are  available  (p27  absent  and  1-50%  tumor 
cells  expressing  p27)  and  consider  the  same  proportions  of  patients  in  each  group, 
154 and 693 patients will be accrued, respectively. With this sample and with 3 years 
follow-up for all patients, greater than 99% power is achieved to detect the difference 
between 0.16 survived at 3 years in the 1-50% group and 0.65 survived at 3 years in 
the  p27  absent  group.  These  results  are  based  on  a  two-sided  test  with  a=0.006. 
More  conservatively,  with  the  same  numbers  of  patients  in  each  group  there  is 
approximately 77% power to detect the difference in survival between 0.50 surviving 
at 3 years in the 1-50% group and 0.65 surviving at 3 years in the p27 absent group. 
All  power  calculations  are  based  on  a  two-sided  comparison  of  the  proportions  of 
patients who have recurred at three years at significance level 0.006 and assume all 
patients  have  been  followed  a  minimum  of  three  years.  [Lachin  JM.  (1981) 
"Introduction  to  sample  size  determination  and  power  analysis  for  clinical  trials," 
Controlled Clinical Trials 2, 93-113] (117) 

Graphical  techniques  and  formal  tests  such  as  those  proposed  by  Cox,  Schoenfeld 
and Anderson will be used to assess validity of assumptions and goodness of fit of the 
proportional  hazards  model  (118-121).  At  the  time  of  analysis  we  will  investigate 
potential differences in disease free interval and survival outcomes  between patients 
with  missing  specimens  and  those who provided specimens to determine if a bias is 
present.  The  role  of  other  factors  potentially  associated  with  outcome  such  as  TNM 
stage, primary tumor site, degree of differentiation and presence of nodal metases will 
be  considered.  (Associations  between  prognostic  markers  and  stage-related  and 
grade-related  clinical  variables  will  be  investigated  in  an  exploratory  analysis.  See 
below.) If there is an apparent bias we will analyze patients with and without missing 
specimens  separately.  Once  the  "best"  model  with  respect  to  baseline  factors  is 
determined  each  of  the eight  markers will be tested individually for association with 
time to recurrence and survival. In each case, the p-value associated with the change 
in the log likelihood ratio will be used to test if the addition of the new marker adds 
significantly  to  the  overall  goodness  of  fit  according  to  the  procedure  of  Hochberg 
[Hochberg,  Y.  "A  sharper  Bonferroni  procedure  for  multiple  tests  of  significance," 
Biometrika  (1988),  75(4):800-802]  (122).  This  procedure  will  be  used  to  control  the 
familywise  error  rate  for  testing  the  eight  hypotheses  for  each  outcome,  time  to 
recurrence  and  survival.  An  overall  significance  level  of  a=0.05  will  be  used.  The  p-
values  associated  with  each  of  the  eight  tests  will  be  ordered  and  compared 
sequentially with the following values beginning with the largest p-value, 0.05, 0.025, 
0.016,  0.0125,  0.010,  0.0083,  0.0071,  0.0062.  If  a  given  p-value  is  found  to  be  less 
than its corresponding level the associated hypothesis and all remaining hypotheses 
will be rejected. 

4.  Multiple Comparisons 

Page 20 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

Controlling  the  familywise  error  rate  will  be  a  concern.  An  attempt  to  control  this 
error  rate  will  be  made  for  the  primary  objectives,  i.e.,  assessing  the  relationships 
between  each  marker  and  time  to  recurrence  and  survival.  In  the  exploratory  data 
analysis p-values will not be emphasized. 

5. 

Exploratory Data Analysis 

An  exploratory  analysis  will  investigate:  1)  the  validity  of  the  normality  assumption 
for  each  marker;  2)  the  potential  inter-relationships  among  markers;  3)  whether 
interactions among the expression of tumor markers identify subsets of patients with 
significantly altered outcome. 

Graphical methods such as box plots, stem and leaf plots, histograms and q-q plots 
will  be  used  to  describe  the  probability  distribution  of  each  marker.  When 
appropriate  these  will  be  based  on  continuous  outcome  measures.  Transformations 
may  be  used  to  achieve  normality.  Joint  distributions  will  also  be  considered.  For 
example,  preliminary  data  has  suggested  that  p53  and  TS  expression  are  highly 
associated.  With  a  sample  size  of  300  specimens  a  correlation  of  0.2  could  be 
detected with an approximate power of 0.80 testing at significance level, a=0.006. 

In  general,  methods  of  determining  the  relationships  among  markers  will  be  guided 
by the underlying distributions. Categorical and nonparametric methods will be used 
as  indicated.  Graphical  methods  will  also  be  used  to  illustrate  the  relationships 
between  markers.  If  appropriate,  i.e.,  the  assumption  of  multivariate  normality 
appears to be justified, methods such as principal components and regression will be 
used to describe relationships among markers. Principal components will be used to 
identify specific markers or groups of markers which may describe underlying factors 
and  regression  analysis  will  be  used  to  determine  the  linear  relationships  between 
markers. 

Associations between prognostic markers and stage-related and grade-related clinical 
variables  will  also  be  investigated.  Once  these  associations  and  the  inter- 
relationships among markers have been identified we will investigate their prognostic 
significance with respect to outcome. 

VII.  TISSUE MICROARRAY ANALYSIS (TMA) PRODUCTION 

1. 

Background 

The  first  concept  of  a  multicore  tissue  block  was  described  in  1986  by  Battifora  to 
test  new  antibodies  by  IHC.  This  concept  has  been  further  refined  through  Tissue 
Microarray  Analysis  (TMA)  described  by  Kononen  et  al  in  1998  which  is  a  high- 
throughput  technique  that  enables  the  analysis  of  hundreds  of  specimens,  by 
arranging  up  to  1,000  samples  of  0.6  mm  tissue  core  biopsy  specimens  taken  from 
donor  blocks  into  a  single  paraffin  block.  Sections  are  then  cut  from  TMA  blocks 
using  standard  microtomes.  This  technique  is  optimally  suited  for  large  scale 
molecular profiling projects and can be applied to all kinds of in situ analyses. 

Several different TMAs may be manufactured and employed in a broad range such as 
determining  the  prevalence  of  genetic  alterations  in  tumors,  progression  studies  to 
find associations between gene or protein alterations and different tumor stages and 
prognostic studies in tumor samples with available clinical follow-up data. Thus, it is 
ideal in a study setting where there is a large collection of well-characterized tissues 
with  attached  clinical  data,  as  it  is  in  our  study,  to  analyze  promising  molecular 
markers for their prognostic significance. 

Validation  studies  have  been  done  to  evaluate  the  representativeness  of  small  disks 
(0.6  mm 
tissue  by  comparing 
immunhistochemistry  findings  on  TMAs  versus  the  corresponding  standard  whole 

in  diameter) 

taken 

from 

the  original 

Page 21 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

tissue  sections.  The  vast  majority  have  shown  a  concordance  rate  of  98-99%  of  the 
results.  The  number  of  cores  required  to  adequately  represent  the  expression  of  a 
marker  has  also  been  evaluated.  In  general,  these  studies  found  that  two  or  three 
core samples provided more representative information than a single sample and that 
adding  more  than  four  or  five  samples  would  not  lead  to  a  massive  improvement  in 
the concordance level [137]. 

2. 

Rationale 

Large  scale  molecular  profiling  of  cancer  specimens  is  slow  and  tedious  when 
traditional  methods  of  molecular  pathology  are  used.  Also,  cutting  traditional  tissue 
sections for a multitude of molecular tests for genes of interest would easily exhaust 
valuable tissue resources. The use of tissue microarray technology offers to overcome 
these  impediments  by  taking  up  to  1000  different  minute  tissue  samples  to  be  put 
into  one  glass  slide  and  simultaneously  analyzed  by  in  situ  methods  such  as 
immunhistochemistry. As this method enables the analysis of hundreds of cases with 
the  amount  of  reagents  usually  used  for  one  case,  this  technique  will  be  both  cost-
efficient  and  time-saving.  Published  studies  claim  that  this  also  offers  an 
unprecedented  degree  of  standardization  as  the  tissue  samples  are  subjected  to  the 
same experimental conditions and batches of reagents [137]. Other advantages would 
be  that  the  interpretation  of  small areas of 0.6 mm is easier since the  heterogeneity 
and staining artifacts at borders of whole sections are eliminated. Punches of 0.6 mm 
also minimize tissue damage on these donor blocks so that they can still be used for 
other studies [138]. 

TMAs  will  optimize  the  use  of  the  collected  histopathologically  well-defined  tissue 
samples in this study with attached clinical data, for current and future applications. 
Currently,  there  is  a  limited  availability  of  TMA  sections  from  various  sources  both 
commercial  and  academic  especially  with  attached  clinical  follow-up,  which  is 
insufficient to cover demands for collaborations. However, the number of institutions 
manufacturing  TMAs  is  increasing  and  it  is  expected  that  virtually  all  institutions 
dealing with tissue analyses will be using TMAs in the future. 

3.  Methods and Procedures 

One  block  representative  for  a  tumor  specimen  per  case  will  be  used.  Under  the 
microscope,  areas  of  interest  from  the  H&E  whole  section  of  the  donor  block,  non-
necrotic areas rich in tumoral glands will be marked accurately. The selection of large 
tumoral areas in the donor block is important to avoid nonevaluable disks. A map of 
the  receiver  block  will  be  prepared  with  coordinates  for  each  sample  to  correctly 
identify  the  tumors.  A  tissue  microarrayer  will  be  used  to  punch  out  3  cores  of  0.6 
mm  diameter  from  each  donor  block  and  positioned  in  the  recipient  paraffin  array 
block, in smaller holes of 0.4 mm for best adhesion of the samples to the array block. 
Additional  cores  greater  than  3  will  be  determined  by  pathology  review. 
Approximately  432  cores  make  up  one block, so therefore 144  patients or cases can 
be  placed  per  TMA  block.  The  array  blocks  will then be incubated 30  minutes at 37 
degrees  centigrade  to  improve  adhesion  between  cores  and  paraffin  of  the  recipient 
block. These blocks will be cut at room temperature with a standard microtome and 
processed according to the study protocol. 

Page 22 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

VIII.  REFERENCES 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

1.  Wingo  PA,  Tong  T,  Bolden  S.  Cancer  statistics,  1995.  CA-  A  Cancer  Journal  for 

Clinicians 45:8-30, 1995 

2.  Muto  T,  Bussey  HJR,  and  Morson  BC.  The  evolution  of  cancer  of  the  colon  and 

rectum. Cancer  36:2251-2276, 1975 

3. 

Laurie  JA,  Moertel  CG,  Fleming  TR,  et  al.  Surgical  adjuvant  therapy  of  large-bowel 
carcinoma:  an  evaluation  of  levamisole  and  the  combination  of  levamisole  and 
fluorouracil. The North Central Cancer Treatment Group and the Mayo Clinic. J Clin 
Oncol. 7:1447-56, 1989. 

4.  Moertel  CG,  Fleming  TR,  MacDonald  JS,  et  al.  Levamisole  and  fluorouracil  for 

adjuvant therapy of resected colon carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 322:352-8, 1990. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

Fisher  B,  Wolmark  N,  Rockette  H,  et  al.  Postoperative  adjuvant  chemotherapy  or 
radiation therapy for rectal cancer: results from NSABP protocol R-01. J Natl Cancer 
Inst 80:21-9, 1988. 

Krook  JE,  Moertel  CG,  Gunderson  LL,  et  al.  Effective  surgical adjuvant therapy for 
high-risk rectal carcinoma. N. Engl J Med 324:709-715, 1991. 

Jass  JR,  Atkin  WS,  Cuzick  J,  et  al.  The  grading  of  rectal  cancer:  historical 
perspectives  and  a  multivariate  analysis  of  447  cases.  Histopathology  10:437-59, 
1986. 

8.  Dukes  CE.  The  classification  of  cancer  of  the  rectum.  J.  Pathol.  Bact.  35:323-332, 

1932. 

9. 

TNM: Classification of Malignant Tumours. Eds. Hermanek P. and Sobin LH. Fourth 
Edition. Springer-Verlag. Berlin. pp 47-50, 1987. 

10.  Gunderson  LL,  Sosin  H.  Areas  of  failure  found  at  reoperation  (second  or 
symptomatic  look.)  following  "curative  surgery"  for  adenocarcinoma  of  the  rectum. 
Cancer  34:1278-92, 1974. 

11.  Astler, VB. and Coller, FA. Prognostic significance of direct extension of carcinoma of 

colon and rectum. Ann. Surg. 139:846-852, 1954. 

12.  Jass  JR.  The  pathological  grading  and  staging  of  rectal  cancer.  Scand  J 

Gastroenterol Suppl. 149:21-38, 1988. 

13.  Bjerkeset T, Morild I, Mork S, Soreide O. Tumor characteristics in colorectal cancer 
and their relationship to treatment and prognosis. Diseases of the Colon & Rectum. 
30(12):934-8, 1987. 

14.  Halvorsen  TB,  Seim  E.  Influence  of  mucinous  components  on survival in colorectal 

adenocarcinomas: a multivariate analysis. J Clin Pathol 41:1068-1072, 1988 

15.  Stahle  E,  Glimelius  B,  Bergstrom  R,  Pahlman  L.  Preoperative  clinical  and 
pathological  variables  in  prognostic  evaluation  of  patients  with  rectal  cancer.  A 
prospective  study  of  327  consecutive  patients.  Acta  Chirurgica  Scandinavica. 
154:231-9, 1988. 

Page 23 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

16.  Fisher ER, Robinsky B, Sass R, Fisher B. Relative prognostic value of the Dukes and 
the  Jass  systems  in  rectal  cancer.  Findings  from  the  National  Surgical  Adjuvant 
Breast and Bowel Projects (Protocol R-01). Dis. Colon Rect. 32:944-9, 1989. 

17.  Tomoda H, Kakeji Y, Furusawa M. Prognostic significance of flow cytometric analysis 
of  DNA  content  in  colorectal  cancer:  a  prospective  study.  J  Surg  Oncol.  53:144-8, 
1993. 

18.  Schillaci  A,  Tirindelli  DD,  Ferri  M,  et  al.  Flow  cytometric  analysis  in  colorectal 
carcinoma:  prognostic  significance  of  cellular  DNA  content.  Int  J  Colorectal  Dis. 
5:223-7, 1990. 

19.  Zoras Ol, Curti G, Cooke TG, Vlachonikolis IG, Forster G, McArdie CS and Stanton 
PD. Prognostic value of ploidy of primary tunour and nodal secondaries in colorectal 
cancers. Surg. Oncol 3(6):345-9, 1994. 

20.  Yamazoe  Y,  Maetani  S,  Nishikawa  T,  Onodera  H,  Tobe  T  and  Imamura  M.  The 
prognostic  role  of  the  DNA  ploidy  pattern  in  colorectal  cancer  analysis  using 
paraffin-embedded tissue by an improved method. Surg. Today 24(1):30-6, 1994. 

21.  Silvestrini  R,  D’Agnano  I,  Faranda  A,  Costa  A,  Zupi  G,  Cosimelli  M,  Quaglliuolo  V, 
Giannarelli  D,  Gennari  L  and  Cavaliere  R.  Flow  cytometric  analysis  of  ploidy  in 
colorectal cancer: a multicentric experience. Br. J. Cancer 67(5):1042-6, 1993. 

22.  Verspaget  HW,  Sier  CFM,  Ganesh  S,  Griffioen  G  and  Lamers  CBHW.  Prognostic 
value  of  plasminogen  activators  and  their  inhibitors  in  colorectal  cancer.  Eur  J 
Cancer, 31A(7/8):1105-9, 1995. 

23.  Murray  GI,  Duncan  ME,  O’Neil  P,  Melvin  WT,  and  Fothergill  JE.  Matrix 
metalloproteinase-1  is  associated  with  poor  prognosis  in  colorectal  cancer.  Nature 
Med 2(4):461-2, 1996. 

24.  Herrlich  P,  Pals  S  and  Ponta  H.  CD44  in  colon  cancer.  Eur  J  Cancer  31A:1110-2, 

1995. 

25.  Nakayama T, Watanabe M, Katsumata T, Teramoto T and Kitajima M. Expression of 
sialyl  Lewis(a)  as  a  new  prognostic  factor  for  patients  with  advanced  colorectal 
carcinoma. Cancer 75(8):2051-6, 1995. 

26.  Fielding  LP  and  Pettigrew  N:  College  of  American  Pathologists  Conference  XXVI  on 
clinical  relevance  of  prognostic  markers  in  solid  tumors.  Report  of  the  Colorectal 
Cancer Working Group. Arch Path and Lab Med 119(12):1115-21, 1995. 

27.   Berger  SH,  Jenh  CH,  Johnson  LF,  and  Berger  FG.  Thymidylate  synthase 
overproduction  and  gene  amplification in fluorodeoxyuridine-resistant human  cells. 
Mol Pharmacol 28:461-467, 1985. 

28.  Swain  SM,  Lippman  ME,  Egan  EF,  Drake  JC,  Steinberg  SM  and  Allegra  CJ. 
Fluorouracil  and  high  doses  leucovorin  in  previously  treated  patients  with 
metastatic breast cancer. J CLin Oncol 7:890-899, 1989. 

Page 24 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

29.   Leichman  L,  Lenz  H-J,    Leichman  CG,  Groshen  S,  Danenberg  KD,  Baranda  J, 
Spears CP, Boswell W, Silberman H, Ortega A, Stain S, Beart R and Danenberg PV. 
Quantitation  of 
for 
resistance  to  protracted  infusion  of  5-fluorouracil  and  weekly  leucovorin  in 
disseminated  colorectal  cancers:  Preliminary  report  from  an  ongoing  trial.  Eur  J 
Cancer 31: 1306-1310, 1995.  

intratumural  thymidylate  synthase  expression  predicts 

30.   Lenz  H-J,  Leichman  CG,  Danenberg  KD,  Danenberg  PV,  Groshen  S,  Cohen  H, 
Laine L,  Crookes  P,  Silberman  H,    Baranda  J,  Garcia  Y,  Li  J,  Leichman  L. 
Thymidylate synthase expression in adenocarcinoma of the stomach: A predictor for 
primary tumor response and overall survival. J Clin Oncol 14:176-182, 1996. 

31.   Horikoshi  T,  Danenberg  KD,  Stadlbaur  THW,  et  al.  Quantitation  of  thymidylate 
synthase,  dihydrofolate  reductase,  and  DT-diaphorase  gene  expression  in  human 
tumors using the polymerase chain reaction. Cancer Res 52:108-116, 1992. 

32.   Johnston  PG,  Liang  CM,  Henry  S,  et  al.  The  production  and  characterization  of 
monoclonal antibodies that localize human thymidylate synthase in the cytoplasm of 
human cells and tissues. Cancer Res 51: 6668-6676, 1991. 

33.   Johnston PG, Lenz HJ, Danenberg KD, et al. Thymidylate synthase protein and gene 
expression  predicts  for  response  to  5-fluorouracil/leucovorin  chemotherapy  in 
patients with colorectal and gastric cancer. Cancer Res 55:1407-1412, 1995. 

34.   Johnston  PG,  Fisher  ER,  Rockette,  HE,  et  al.  The  role  of  thymidylate  synthase 
expression  in  prognosis  and  outcome  to  adjuvant  chemotherapy  in  patients  with 
rectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 12:2640-2647, 1994. 

35.   Johnston PG, Allegra CJ: Colorectal Cancer Biology. Clinical Implications. Seminars 

in Oncology 5:418-432, 1995. 

36.   Harpole DH, Herndon JE, Wolfe WG, Iglehart JD and Marks JR. A prognostic model 
of  recurrence  and  death  in  stage  I  non-small  lung  cancer  utilizing  presentation, 
histopathology and oncoprotein expression. Cancer Res 55: 51-56, 1995. 

37.   Isobe  T,  Hiyama  K,  Yoshida  Y,  Fujiwara  Y,  Yamajidao  M.  Prognostic  significance  of 
p53  and  ras  gene  abnormalities  in  lung  adenocarcinoma  patients  with  stage  I 
disease after curative resection. Jpn J Cancer Res 85:1240-1246, 1994. 

38.   Allred  DG,  Clark  GM,  Elledge  R,  Fuqua  SAW,  Brown  RW,  Chamness  GC,  Osborne 
CK, McGuire WL. Association of p53 protein expression with tumor cell proliferation 
rate and clinical outcome in node-negative breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 85:200-
206, 1993. 

39.   Silvestrini R, Benini E, Daidone MG, Veneroni S, Borachi P, Cappelletti V, Di Fronzo 
G,  Veronesi  U.  p53  as  an  independent  prognostic  marker  in  lymph  node-negative 
breast cancer patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 85:965-970, 1993.  

40.  Bergh J, Norberg T, Sjogren S, Lindgren A and Holmberg L. Complete sequencing of 
the p53 gene provides prognostic information in breast cancer patients, particularly 
in  relation  to adjuvant systemic therapy and radiography. Nature Med 1(10): 1029-
34, 1995. 

41.   Esrig  D,  Elmajian  D,  Groshen  S,  Freeman  JA,  Stein  JP,  Chen  S-C,  Nichols  PW, 
Skinner  DG,  Jones  PA  and  Cote  RJ.  Accumulation  of  nuclear  p53  and  tumor 
progression in bladder cancer. N Engl J Med 331: 1259-1264, 1994. 

Page 25 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

42.  Offerhaus  GJA,  De  Feyter  EP,  Cornelisse  CJ,  Tersmette  KWF,  Floyd  J,  Kern  SE, 
Volgelstein  B  and  Hamilton  SR.  The  relationship  of  DNA  aneuploidy  to  molecular 
genetic alterations in colorectal carcinoma. Gastroenterology 102:1612-1619, 1992. 

43.  Hsiao  MH,  Yu  AL,  Yeargin  J,  Haas  M,  et  al.  Nonhereditary  p53  mutations  in  T-cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia are associated with the relapse phase. Blood 83:2922-
2930, 1994. 

44.   Scott  N,  Sagar  P,  Stewart  J,  et  al.  p53  in  colorectal  cancer:  Clinicopatholgical 

correlation and prognostic significance. Br J Cancer 63:317-319, 1991. 

45.   Remvikos  Y,  Tominaga  O,  Hammel,  P,  et  al.  Increased  p53  protein  content  of 

colorectal tumours correlates with poor survival. Br J Cancer 66: 758-764, 1992. 

46.   Bell SM, Scott N, Cross D, et al. Prognostic value of p53 overexpression and c-ki-ras 

mutations in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 104:57-64, 1993. 

47.  Sun  X-F,  Carstensens  JM,  Stal  O,  Zhang  H,  Nilsson  E,  Sjödahl  R,  Nordenskjöd  B. 
Prognostic  significance  of  p53  expression  in  relation  to  DNA  ploidy  in  colorectal 
adenocarcinoma. Virchows Archiv Pathol Anat 423:443-448, 1993. 

48.  Zeng  Z-S,  Sarkis  AS,  Zhang  Z-F,  Klimstra  DS,  Charytonowicz  E,  Guillem  JG, 
Cordon-Cardo C, Cohen AM. p53 nuclear overexpression: An independent predictor 
of survival in lymph-node positive colorectal cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 10:2043-
2050, 1994. 

49.   Bosari  S,  Viale  G,  Roncalli  M,  Graziani  D,  Borsani  G,  Lee  AKC,  Coggi  G.  p53  gene 
mutations,  p53  protein  accumulation  and  compartimentalization  in  colorectal 
adenocarcinoma. Am J Pathol 147:790-798, 1995. 

50.   Nathosanson  SD,  Linden  MD,  Tender  P,  Zarbo  RJ,  Jacobsen  MS,  Nelson  LT. 
Relationship  among  p53,  stage  and  prognosis  of  large  bowel  cancer.  Dis  Colon 
Rectum 37:527-534, 1994. 

51.   Auvinen A, Isola J, Visakorpi T, Koivula T, Virtanen S, Halama M. Overexpression of 

p53 and long-term survival in colon carcinoma. Br J Cancer 70:293-296, 1994. 

52.   Yamaguchi A, Nakagawara G, Kursaka Y, Nishimura G, Yonemura Y and Miyazaki I. 
p53  immunoreaction  in  endoscopic  biopsy  specimens  of  colorectal  cancer  and  its 
prognostic significance. Br J Cancer 68:399-402, 1993. 

53.  Yamaguchi A, Kurosaka Y, Fushida S, et al. Expression of p53 protein in colorectal 

cancer and its relationship to short term prognosis. Cancer 70:2778-2784, 1992. 

54.  Cripps  KJ,  Purdie  CA,  Carder  PJ,  White  S,  Komine  K,  Bird  CC  and  Wyllie  AH.  A 
study of stabilisation of p53 protein  versus  point mutation in colorectal carcinoma. 
Oncogene 9:2739-2743, 1994. 

55.   Lenz HJ, Danenberg KD, Leichman CG, Hayashi K, Metzger R, Solonga D, Banerjee 
D,  Bertino  JR,  Leichman  L,  Danenberg  PV.  p53  status,  thymidylate  synthase  (TS) 
levels  are  predictors  of  chemotherapy  efficacy  in  patients  with  advanced  colorectal 
cancer. Proc ASCO (abstract), 504, p 216, 1996.  

56.   Banerjee  D,  Lenz  H-J,  Schnieders  B,  Kheradpour  A,  Manno  DJ,  Danenberg  KD, 
Danenberg PV and Bertino JR. Transfection of wild type but not mutant p53 induces 
early  monocytic  differentiation  in  HL-60  cells.  Cell  Growth  &  Differ  6:1405-1413, 
1995. 

Page 26 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

57.   Harper JW, Adami GR, Wei N, Keyomarsi K and Elledge SJ. The p21 Cdk-interacting 
protein CIP1 is a potent inhibitor of G1 Cyclin-dependent-kinases. Cell 75: 805-816, 
1993. 

58.   el-Deiry  WS,  Harper  JW,  O'Connor  PM,  Velculescu  VE,  Canman  CE,  Jackman  J, 
Pietenpol  JA,  Burell  M,  Hill  DE,  Wang  Y  et  al.  WAF1/CIP1  is  induced  in  p53-
mediated G1 arrest and apoptosis. Cancer Res 54:1169-1174, 1994. 

59.  Peter  M  and  Herskowitz  I.  Joining  the  complex:  cyclin-dependent  kinase  inhibitory 

proteins and the cell cycle. Cell 79:181-184, 1994. 

60.   el-Deiry WS, Tokino T, Velculescu VE, Levy DB, Parsons R, Trent JM, Mercer E, Lin 
D,  Kinzler  KW  and  Vogelstein  B.  WAF1,  a  potential  mediator  of  p53  tumor 
suppression. Cell 75: 817-825, 1993. 

61.  Li CY, Suardet L and Little JB. Prognostic role of WAF1/CIP1/p21 as a mediator of 

TGF-beta cytoinhibitory effect. J Biol Chem 270:4971-4974, 1995. 

62.  Wang QM, Jones JB and Studzinski GP. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27 as a 
mediator  of  the  G1-S  phase  block  induced  by  1,25-dihydroxyvitamin  D3  in  HL60 
cells. Cancer Res 56(2):264-7, 1996. 

63.  Coats  S,  Flanagan  WM,  Nourse  J  and  Roberts  JM.  Requirement  of  p27Kip1  for 

restriction point control of the fibroblast cell cycle. Science 272:887-880, 1996. 

64.  Fearon ER, Vogelstein B.  A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 61:759-

767, 1990. 

65.  Uchino  S,  Tsuda  H,  Noguchi  M,  Yokota  J,  Terada  M,  Saito  T,  Kobayashi  M, 
Sugimura T, Hifohashi S. Frequent loss of heterozygosity at the DCC locus in gastric 
cancer. Cancer Res 52:3099-3102, 1992. 

66.  Hohne  MW,  Halatsch  ME,  Kahl  GF,  Weinel  RJ.  Frequent  loss  of  expression  of  the 
potential  tumor  suppressor  gene  DCC  in  ductal  pancreatic  cancer.  Cancer  Res 
52:2616-2619, 1992.  

67.  Gao X, Honn KV, Grignon D, Sakr W, Chen YQ. Frequent loss of expression and loss 
of  heterozygosity  of  the  putative  tumor  suppressor  gene  DCC  in  prostatic 
carcinomas. Cancer Res 53:2723-2727, 1993. 

68.  Scheck  AC,  Coons  SW.  Expression  of  the  tumor  suppressor  gene  DCC  in  human 

Gliomas. Cancer Res 53:5605-9, 1993. 

69.  Devilee  P,  Vliet  MV,  Kuipers-Dijkshorn  N,  Pearson  PL,  Cornelisse  CJ.  Somatic 
genetic changes on chromosome 18 in breast carcinomas: is the DCC gene involved? 
Oncogene 6:311-15, 1991. 

70.  Fearon  ER,  Cho  KR,  Nigro  JM,  Kern  SE,  Simons  JW,  Ruppert  JM,  Hamilton  SR, 
Preisinger AC, Thomas G, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Identification of a chromosome 
18q gene which is altered in colorectal cancers. Science 247:49-56, 1990. 

71.  Tanaka  K,  Oshimura  M,  Kikuchi  R,  Seki  M,  Hayashi  T,  Miyaki  M.  Suppression  of 
in  human  colon  carcinoma  cells  by  introduction  of  normal 

tumorigenicity 
chromosome 5 or 18. Nature 349:340-42, 1991. 

Page 27 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

72.  Klingelhutz  AJ,  Hedrick  L,  Cho  KR,  McDougall  JK.  The  DCC  gene  suppresses  the 
malignant  phenotype  of  transformed  human  epithelial  cells.  Oncogene  10:1581-6, 
1995. 

73.  Narayan  R,  Lawlor  KG,  Schaapveld  RQ,  Cho  KR,  Vogelstein  B,  Bui-Vinh  Tran  P, 
Osborne MP, Telang NT. Antisense RNA to the putative tumor-suppressor gene DCC 
transforms Rat-1 fibroblasts. Oncogene 7:553-61, 1992. 

74.  Hedrick  L,  Cho  KR,  Fearon  ER,  Wu  TC,  Kinzler  KW,  Vogelstein  B.  The  DCC  gene 
product  in  cellular  differentiation  and  colorectal  tumorigenesis.  Genes  and 
Development 8:1174-1183, 1994. 

75.  Pierceall  WE,  Cho  KR,  Getzenberg  RH,  Reale  MA,  Hedrick  L,  Vogelstein  B,  Fearon 
ER.  The  deleted  in  colorectal  cancer  (DCC)  tumor  suppressor  gene  product 
stimulates  neurite  outgrowth  in  rat  PC12  pheochromocytoma  cells.  J  Cell  Bio 
124:1017-1027, 1994. 

76.  Chuong  CM,  Jiang  TX,  Yin  E,  Widelitz  RB.  cDCC  (chicken  homologue  to  a  gene 
deleted in colorectal carcinoma) is  an epithelial adhesion molecule expressed in the 
basal cells and involved in epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. Dev Biol 164:383-97, 
1994. 

77.  Vielmetter  J,  Kayyem  JF,  Roman  JM,  Dreyer  WJ.  Neogenin,  an  avian  cell  surface 
protein  expressed  during  terminal  neuronal  differentiation,  is  closely  related  to  the 
human  tumor  suppressor  molecule  deleted  in  colorectal  cancer.  J  Cell  Biol 
127:2009-20, 1994. 

78. 

Iino H, Fukayama M, Maeda Y, Koike M, Mori T, Takahashi T, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, 
Miyaki  M,  Mizuno  S,  Watanabe  S.  Molecular  genetics  for  clinical  management  of 
colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 73:1324-1331, 1994. 

79.  Jen J, Kim H, Piantadosi S, Lis ZF, Levitt RC, Sistonen P, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, 
Hamilton  SR.  Allelic  loss  of  chromosome  18q  and  prognosis  in  colorectal  cancer.  N 
Engl J Med 331:213-21, 1994. 

80.  Folkman  J.  The  role  of  angiogenesis  in  tumor  growth.  Sem.  Cancer  Biol.  3:65-71, 

1992. 

81.  Folkman J and Shing Y. Angiogenesis. J Biol Chem 267: 10931-10934, 1992. 

82.  Gasparini  G,  Harris  AL.  Clinical  importance  of  the  determination  of  tumor 
angiogenesis  in  breast  carcinoma:  Much  more  than  a  new  prognostic  tool.  J  Clin 
Oncol 13:7652-7782, 1995. 

83.  Weidner  N,  Folkman  J,  Pozza  F,  Bevilacqua  P,  Allred  EN,  Moore  DH,  Meli  S  and 
Gasparini  G.  Tumor  angiogenesis:  a  new  significant  and  indepedent  prognostic 
indicator  in  early-stage  breast  carcinoma.  J  Natl  Cancer  Inst  84(24):1875-1887, 
1992. 

84.  Bevilacqua P, Barbareschi M, Verderio P, Boracchi P, Caffo O, Dalla Palma P, Meli S, 
Weidner N and Gasparini G. Prognostic value of intratumoral microvessel density, a 
measure  of  tumor  angiogenesis,  in  node-negative  breast  carcinoma--results  of  a 
multiparametric study. Br Cancer Res and Treat 36(2):205-17, 1995. 

85.  Bremer GL, Tiebosch AT,  van der Putten HW, Schouten HJ, de Haan J and Arends 
JW.  Tumor  angiogenesis:  an  independent  prognostic  parameter  in  cervical  cancer. 
Am J Ob and Gyn 174(1Pt 1):126-31, 1996. 

Page 28 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

86.  Bochner  BH,  Cote  RJ,  Weidner  N,  Groshen  S,  Chen  SC,  Skinner  DG  and  Nichols 
PW.  Angiogenesis  in  bladder  cancer:  relationship  between  microvessel  density  and 
tumor prognosis. J Natl Cancer Inst  87(21):1603-12, 1995. 

87.  Weidner  N.  Tumor  angiogenesis:  review  of  current  applications 

in  tumor 

prognostication. Sem Diag Path 10(4):302-13, 1993. 

88.  Hollingsworth HC, Kohn EC,  Steinberg SM, Rothenberg ML  and  Merino MJ. Tumor 

angiogenesis in advanced stage ovarian carcinoma. Am J Path 147(1):33-41, 1995. 

89.  Maeda K, Chung YS, Takatsuka S, Ogawa Y, Sawada T, Yamashita Y, Onoda N, Kato 
Y,  Nitta  A,  Arimoto  Y,  et  al.  Tumor  angiogenesis  as  a  predictor  of  recurrence  in 
gastric carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 13(2):477-81, 1995. 

90.  Ferrara  N,  Houch  KA,  Jakeman  LB,  and  Leung  DW.  Molecular  and  biological 
properties  of  the  vascular  endothelial  growth  factor  family  of  proteins.  Endocrine 
Reviews. 13:18-32, 1992. 

91.  Brown LF, Berse B, Jackman RW, Tognazzi K, Manseau EJ, Senger DR, and Dvorak 
HF.  Expression  of  vascular  permeability  factor  (vascular  endothelial  growth  factor) 
and  its  receptors  in  adenocarcinomas  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract.  Cancer  Res. 
53:4727-4735, 1993. 

92.  Olson  TA,  Mohanraj  D,  Carson  LF,  and  Ramakrishnan  S.  Vascular  permeability 
factor  gene  expression  in  normal  and  neoplastic  human  ovaries.  Cancer  Res. 
54:276-280, 1994. 

93.  Plate KH, Breier G, Weich HA, and Risau W. Vascular endothelial growth factor is a 
potential tumor angiogenesis factor in human gliomas in vivo. Nature  359:845-848, 
1992. 

94.  Warren  RS,  Yuan  H,  Matli  MR,  Gillett  NA  and  Ferrara  N.  Regulation  by  vascular 
endothelial growth factor of human colon cancer tumorigenesis in a mouse model of 
experimental liver metastasis. J Clin Invest  95:1789-1797, 1995. 

95.  Takahashi Y, Kitadai Y, Bucana CD, Cleary KR and Ellis LM. Expression of vascular 
endothelial  growth  factor  and  its  receptor,  KDR,  correlates  with  vascularity, 
metastasis,  and  proliferation  of  human  colon  cancer.  Cancer  Res  55:3964-3968, 
1995. 

96.  Frank  RE,  Saclarides  TJ, Leurgans S, Speziale  NJ, Drab EA and Rubin DB. Tumor 
angiogenesis  as  a  predictor  of  recurrence  and  survival  in  patients  with  node- 
negative colon cancer. Annals of Surg  222(6):695-699, 1995. 

97.  Bossi  P,  Viale  G,  Lee  AKC,  Alfano  R,  Coggi  G  and  Bosari  S.  Angiogenesis  in 
colorectal  tumors:  microvessel  quantitation  in  adenomas  and  carcinomas  with 
clinicopathological correlations. Cancer Res  55:5049-5053, 1995. 

98.  Wiltz O, O'Hara CJ, Steele GD Jr., Mercurio AM. Expression of enzymatically active 
is  a  ubiquitous  property  of  colon  adenocarcinomas. 

sucrase-isomaltase 
Gastroenterology 100:1266-78, 1991. 

99.  Wiltz  O,  O'Hara  CJ,  Steele  GD,  Mercurio  AM.  Sucrase-isomaltase:  a  marker 
associated  with  the  progression  of  adenomatous  polyps  to  adenocarcinomas. 
Surgery  108:269-75, 1990. 

Page 29 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

100.  Andrews  CW  Jr.,  O'Hara  CJ,  Goldman  H,  et  al.  Sucrase-isomaltase  expression  in 

chronic ulcerative colitis and dysplasia. Hum Pathol. 23:774-9, 1992. 

101.  Real  FX,  Xu  M,  Vila  MR,  de  Bolos  C.  Intestinal  brush-border-associated  enzymes: 

co-ordinated expression in colorectal cancer. Int J Cancer 51:173-81, 1992. 

102.  Jessup JM, Lavin PT, Andrews CW Jr., et al. Sucrase-Isomaltase is an Independent 

Prognostic Marker for Colorectal Carcinoma. Dis. Colon Rectum 38:1257-64, 1995. 

103.  Cross  HS,  Quaroni  A.  Inhibition  of  sucrase-isomaltase  expression  by  EGF  in  the 

human colon adenocarcinoma cells Caco-2. Am J Physiol. 261:C1173-83, 1991. 

104.  Witzig TE, Loprinzi CH, Gonchoroff NJ, Reiman HM, Cha SS, Wieand HS, Katzmann 
JA,  Paulsen  JK,  Moertel  CG.  DNA  ploidy  and  cell  kinetic  measurements  as 
predictors of recurrence and survival in stages B2 and C colorectal adenocarcinoma. 
Cancer 68(4):879-888, August 15, 1991. 

105.  Hedley  D,  Friedlander  M,  Taylor  I,  Pregg  C,  Musgrove  E.  Method  for  analysis  of 
cellular  DNA  content  of  paraffin-embedded  pathological  material  using  flow 
cytometry. J Histochem Cytochem 31:1333-1335, 1983. 

106.  Bauer  KD,  Bagwell  CB,  Giaretti  W,  Melamed  M,  Zarbo  RJ,  Witzig  TE,  Rabinovitch 
PS.  Consensus  Review  of  the  Clinical  Utility  of  DNA  Flow  Cytometry  in  Colorectal 
Cancer. Cytometry 14:486-491, 1993. 

107.  Lise M, Loda M, Fiorentino M, Mercurio AM, Summerhayes IC, Lavin PT, and Jessup 
JM.  Association  between  sucrase-isomaltase  (SI)  and  p53  expression  in  colorectal 
cancer. Manuscript submitted to Annals of Surgical Oncology. 

108.  Mulder  J-WR,  Offerhaus  GJA,  Vogelstein  B,  Hamilton  SR.  An  evaluation  of  six 
antibodies  for  immunohistochemistry  of  mutant  p53  gene  product  in  archival 
colorectal neoplasms. J Pathol 172:5-12, 1994. 

109.  Lenz HJ, Ju J-F, Danenberg KD, Leichman L, Leichman CG, Haag C, Danenberg PV. 
TS levels and p53 function predict for response to 5-fluorouracil/LV in patients with 
advanced colorectal cancer. Proc ASCO (abstract) 14, p202, 1995. 

110.  Loda  M,  Cukor  B,  Tam  SW,  Lavin  P,  Fiorentino  M,  Draetta  G,  Jessup  JM,  and 
Pagano  M.  p27  is  an  independent  prognostic  marker  in  colorectal  carcinoma. 
(manuscript submitted to N. Engl. J. Med.). 

111.  Warren  RS,  Yuan  H,  Matli  MR,  Ferrara  N  and  Donner  DB.  Induction  of  vascular 
endothelial cell growth factor by insulin like growth factor 1 in colorectal carcinoma. 
J Biol Chem, 1996, in press. 

112.  Vartanian  RK  and  Weidner  N.  Endothelial  cell  proliferation  in  prostatic  carcinoma 
and prostatic hyperplasia: correlation with Gleason’s score, microvessel density, and 
epithelial cell proliferation. Lab Invest 73(6) 844-850, 1995. 

Page 30 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

113.  Bevilacqua P, Barbareschi M, Verderio P, Boracchi P, Caffo O, Dalla Palma P, Meli S, 
Weidner N and Gasparini G. Prognostic value of intratumoral microvessel density, a 
measure  of  tumor  angiogenesis,  in  node-negative  breast  carcinoma--results  of  a 
multiparametric study. Br Cancer Res and Treat 36(2):205-17, 1995. 

114.  Jaeger  TM,  Weidner  N,  Chew  K,  Moore  DH,  Kerschmann  RL,  Waldman  FM  and 
Carroll  PR.  Tumor  angiogenesis  correlates  with  lymph  node  metastases  in  invasive 
bladder cancer. J of Urology  154(1):69-71, 1995. 

115.  Weidner  N.  Current  pathologic  methods  for  measuring  intratumoral  microvessel 
density  within  breast  carcinoma  and  other  solid  tumors.  Br  Cancer  Res  and  Treat 
36(2):169-80, 1995. 

116.  Tomisaki  S,  Ohno  S,  Ichiyoshi  Y,  Kuwano  H,  Mashara  Y  and  Sugimachi  K. 
Microvessel quantification and its possible relation with liver metastasis in colorectal 
cancer. Cancer 77:1722-1728, 1996. 

117.  Davies  M,  Fleiss  JL.  Measuring  agreement  for  multinomial  data.  Biometrics  38: 

1047-1051, 1982. 

118.  Fleiss JL. Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, New York, Wiley, 1981. 

119.  Landis  JR  and  Koch  GG.  The  measurement  of  observer  agreement  for  categorical 

data. Biometrics 33:159-175, 1977. 

120.  Landis JR and Koch GG.  An application of hierarchical kappa-type statistics in the 

assessment of multiple observers. Biometrics 33:363-374, 1977. 

121.  Darroch  JN  and  McCloud  PI.  Category  distinguishability  and  observer  agreement. 

Aust. J. Statistics 28:371-388, 1986. 

122.  Tanner  MA  and  Young  MA.  Modelling  agreement  among  raters.  J  Am  Stat  Assoc 

80:175-180, 1985. 

123.  Agresti  A.  A  model  for  agreement  between  ratings  on  an  ordinal  scale.  Biometrics 

44:539-548, 1988. 

124.  NAG  "The  GLIM  Release  3.77  Manual."  Downers  Grove,  Illinois.  Numerical 

Algorithms Group, Inc., 1985. 

125.  SAS  Institute,  Inc.  "SAS  User’s  Guide:  Statistics,  Version  6  Edition."  Cary,  North 

Carolina. SAS Institute, Inc, 1992. 

126.  McNemar  Q.  Note  on  the  sampling  error  of  the  difference  between  correlated 

proportions or percentages. Psychometrica, 12:153-157, 1947. 

127.  Cox DR. Analysis of Binary Data, Chapman Hall, London, 18-19, 1970. 

128.  Mehta  CR,  Patel  NR,  Tsiatis  AA.  Exact  Significance  Testing  for  Ordered  Categorical 

Data, Biometrics, 40: 819-825, 1984. 

129.  Hochberg  Y  and  Tamhane  AC.  Multiple  Comparison  Procedures,  New  York,  Wiley, 

1987. 

130.  Cox  DR.  Regression  models  and  life  tables  (with  discussion).  J  Roy  Statist  Soc  B 

34:187-220, 1972. 

Page 31 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX IV 

131.  Cox  DR.  A  note  on  the  graphical  analysis  of  survival  data.  Biometrika  66:188-190, 

1979. 

132.  Schoenfeld  D.  Goodness  of  fit  tests  for  the  proportional  hazards  regression  model. 

Biometrika 67:145-154, 1980. 

133.  Andersen  PK.  Testing  goodness  of  fit  of  Cox’s  regression  and  life  model.  Biometrics 

38:67-77, 1982. 

134.  Kalbfleisch JD and Prentice RL. "The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data." New 

York. Wiley. 70-118, 1980. 

135.  Jonckheere  AR.  A  distribution-free  K-sample  test  against  ordered  alternatives. 

Biometrika 1954;41:133-145. 

136.  Gail  MH.  A  review  and  critique  of  some  models  used  in  competing  risk  analysis. 

Biometrics 31:209-222, 1975. 

137  Simon  R,  Mirlacher  M,  Sauter  G.  Tissue  microarrays  in  cancer  diagnosis.  Expert 

Rev. Mol. Diagn. 3(4): 421-430 (2003). 

138  Jourdan  F,  Sebbagh  N,  et  al.  Tissue  microarray  technology:  validation  incolorectal 
carcinoma  and  analysis  of  p53,  hMLH1,  and  hMSH2  immunohistochemical 
expression. Virchows Arch 443: 115-121 (2003). 

139.  Hoos  A,  Nissan  A,  et  al.  Tissue  Microarray  Molecular  Profiling  of  early,  node-
negative  adenocarcinoma  of  the  Rectum:  A  Comprehensive  Analysis.  Clin.  Cancer 
Res. 8:3841-3849 (2002). 

 

 

 

Page 32 of 32 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

 

APPENDIX V 

 

CALGB Data Collection Forms Package 

 
 

C-437  GI Adjuvant On-Study Form (Ver. 2) 

C-447  Tissue Sample Tracking Form - Blocks 

C-438  GI Adjuvant Follow-up Form 

C-272  CALGB Adverse Event Form 

C-300  CALGB: Off Treatment Notice 

C-400  CALGB: Long-Term Follow-Up Form 

C-215  CALGB Secondary Malignancy Form 

C-113  CALGB Notification of Death Form 

C-260  CALGB Remarks Addenda 

 

11/15/04 
 

 

 

American 
Indian or 
Alaskan 
Native 

Asian or 
Pacific 
Islander 

Female 

Male 

Unknown 

Total 

2 

2 

0 

4 

22 

9 

0 

31 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VI 

 

GENDER AND MINORITY TARGET ACCRUAL 

 
 
 

Black, not 

Hispanic 

of 

Hispanic 

Origin 

126 

92 

0 

218 

 

16 

9 

0 

25 

White, 
not of 

Hispanic 

Origin 

801 

992 

0 

1793 

Other or 
Unknown 

Total 

16 

13 

0 

29 

983 

1117 

0 

2100 

HHS Racial and Ethnic Categories 

American Indian or Alaskan Native: A person having origins in any of the original peoples of North 
America,  and  who  maintains  cultural  identification  through  tribal  affiliation  or  community 
recognition. 

Asian  or  Pacific  Islander:  A  person  having  origins  in  any  of  the  original  peoples  of  the  Far  East, 
Southeast  Asia,  the  Indian  subcontinent,  or  the  Pacific  Islands.  This  area  includes  China, 
India, Japan, Korea, the Philippine Islands and Samoa. 

Black, not of Hispanic Origin: A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa. 

Hispanic:  A  person  of  Mexican,  Puerto  Rican,  Cuban,  Central  or  South  American  or  other  Spanish 

culture or origin regardless of race. 

White,  not  of  Hispanic  Origin:  A  person  having  origins  in  any  of  the  original  peoples  of  Europe, 

North Africa, or the Middle East. 

 

 
11/15/04 

APPENDIX VII 

 

EXPANDED PARTICIPATON PROJECT (EPP) 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VII 

 

1.0  EPP RANDOMIZATION AND REGISTRATION PROCEDURES 

I.  EPP  institutions  will  register  a  patient  by  completing  the  CALGB  9581  Eligibility 
Checklist  and  Randomization  Worksheet  on-line.  Patients  must  be  randomized  no 
later  than  42  days  post-surgical  resection,  and  must  begin  first  treatment  no  earlier 
than  7  days  and  no  later  than  42  days  post-surgical  resection.  The  Clinical  Trials 
Management  Unit  (CTMU)  will  assess  eligibility  criteria.  Questions  pertaining  to 
eligibility  criteria  should  be  directed  to  the  CTMU,  medical  questions  should  be 
directed to the study chair. 

II.  A signed HHS 310 form documenting the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval for 
this study must be on file at the CTMU before the EPP institution can enter a patient. 
IRB approval date must be less than one year prior to the date of registration. 

III.  Once eligibility is confirmed, the CTMU will call and register the patient with CALGB 
who will send a Confirmation of Registration and treatment assignment to the CTMU. 
The  registering  institution  will  be  provided  the  treatment  assignment  by  the  CTMU. 
Please check for errors, and submit any corrections on-line to the CTMU. 

2.0  EPP DATA SUBMISSION 

Data  must  be  submitted  electronically  directly  to  the  CTMU  according  to  the  following 
schedule: 

FORM 

TIME OF SUBMISSION 

1. CALGB 9581 Eligibility Checklist & 

At time of registration 

Randomization Worksheet  

2. GI Adjuvant On-Study Form (C-437, 

Within 1 week of registration 

Version 1.0) 

Operative/Pathology Reports* 

3. CALGB Pathology Routing Form (C-

Within 1 month of registration 

407, Version 1.0) 

Blocks,  including a copy of the 
pathology report** 

4. EPP Toxicity Form 

5. EPP Follow-up Form 

 6. EPP Chemotherapy/ 

Immunotherapy/Hormonal Therapy 
Form 

7. EPP Off-treatment Form  

Treatment Arm Only:  Months 1, 2, 3, and every 
three months for 1 year after termination of 
treatment 

Treatment Arm: Every 3 months while on protocol 
treatment every 6 months after completion of 
protocol treatment until death. Observation Arm: 
Every 3 months for 1 year, then every 6 months 
thereafter until death. 

Treatment Arm Only:  Upon completion of 
protocol treatment 

Treatment Arm Only:  Upon completion of all 
protocol treatment 

8. EPP Recurrence Form 

At the time of recurrence 

1

 
11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VII 

FORM 

TIME OF SUBMISSION 

9. EPP Notice of Secondary Malignancy 

Within 10 days of diagnosis 

Form  

10. EPP Death Form 

Within 7 days of knowledge of event 

*  Legible  copies  of  institutional  operative  notes  and  pathology  reports  must  be 
submitted  to  the  CTMU  (Fax:  301-299-3991).  The  operative  report  must  contain  a 
detailed  description  of  the  operative  findings  with  specific  reference  to  the  extent  of 
disease, the presence or absence of metastasis, and whether any adjacent organs were 
adherent to and/or removed with the specimen. The original surgical procedure must 
be  classified as ‘curative’ or ‘non-curative’ by the operating surgeon. It is also helpful 
to include a drawing of the portion of the colon that was removed along with the blood 
supply and lymphatic drainage. The surgeon will mark the location of the tumor and 
indicate the extent of the colonic and mesentric resection. 

**  Refer to the Pathology Submission Section. 

3.0  EPP PATHOLOGY SUBMISSION 

The  following  materials  will  be  necessary  for  each  patient  entered  on  study:  Pathology 
report  and  paraffin  block  of  tissue  samples.  It  is  important  that  the  samples  sent  are 
representative of tumor. Cytology specimens cannot be analyzed and thus are not eligible 
for study. CALGB Pathology Routing Form (C-407, Version 1.0) must be completed on-line 
and  a  copy  printed  (CTRL  P)  and  sent  along  with  the  required  samples,  and  pathology 
report via regular mail to: 

CALGB Central Pathology Office 
The Ohio State University 
B054 Graves Hall 
333 West 10th Ave. 
Columbus, OH 43210-1239 
Tel: 614-688-3495  Fax: 614-292-5618 

 

2

 
11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VII 

4.0  EPP ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING 

For  EPP  Institutions,  all  AER’s  are  to  be  reported  through  the  CTMU  using  the  Adverse 
Reaction  (ADR)  Form  for  Investigational  Drugs.  These  reports  will  be  reviewed  and 
directed  to  the  appropriate  Group  and  regulatory  offices.  AER  reporting  is  based  on  the 
revised  NCI  Common  Toxicity  Criteria  (version  2.0).  ADR’s  will  be  faxed  to  the  CTMU 
based on the following adverse event reporting requirements table: 

AGENT 

 

Investigational Agents 
 

Expected AE 

Investigational Agents 
 
Unexpected AE 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

GRADE 

----- 

------ 

----- 

ADR* 

ADR 

----- 

ADR 

ADR 

24hr/ADR 

24hr/ADR 

ADR = Adverse Drug Reaction Report (within 7 days) 

hr = Reported toCTMU within 24 hours 

*  Grade  4  hematosuppression  does  not  have  to  be  reported  for  agents  known  and 

expected to cause hematosuppression at the dose used. 

Summaries  of  adverse  events  requiring  24-hour  reporting  are  to  be  faxed  or  e-mailed  to 
the CTMU within 24 hours and will be forwarded to the NCI and the Coordinating Group. 
Adverse  Drug  Reaction  reports  should  be  submitted  via  fax  within  7  days  of  the  event. 
These will be forwarded to the NCI and the Coordinating Group within 3 working days. All 
AERs should be reported to the local IRB. 

For commercially available drugs, written reporting of any increased incidence of a known 
AER is also required in addition to grade 4 and 5 toxicities. 

All toxicities, including those with separate reporting requirements described above, must 
be reported on the Toxicity Form. Deaths are required to be reported via the Death Form 
within 7 days of knowledge of the event. 

4.1  Secondary Malignancies 

All  investigators  are  required  to  report  secondary  malignancies  occurring  on  or 
following treatment on NCI-sponsored protocols using commercial drugs. Reporting of 
cases  of  secondary  AML/MDS  is  to  be  performed  using  the  NCI/CTEP  Secondary 
AML/MDS Report Form. This form should be used in place of the DCT Adverse Event 
Form for reporting this toxicity. All other secondary malignancies should be reported 
using  the  form  DCT  Adverse  Drug  Reaction  Report.  The  EPP  Notice  of  Secondary 
Malignancy must also be completed for all cases of secondary malignancy. 

 

3

 
11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PATHOLOGIC PROGNOSTIC FACTORS IN STAGE II COLON CARCINOMA 

 

 

 

 
11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

 

PATHOLOGIC PROGNOSTIC FACTORS IN STAGE II COLON CARCINOMA 

 

 

 

Study Investigator: 

Carolyn Compton, M.D., Ph.D. 

Massachusetts General Hospital 

1.0  PATHOLOGIC PROGNOSTIC FACTORS 

Compared  to  data  derived  from  additional  assays,  prognostic  information  that  can  be 
derived directly from standard histologic sections of a tumor is of the greater cost-benefit 
to  the  patient.  In  the  current  era  of  cost  containment,  it  is  essential  that  the  prognostic 
and/or  predictive  significance  of  pathologic  prognostic  factors  be  defined.  In  colorectal 
cancer,  pathologic  features  were  among  the  first  variables  studied  with  reference  to 
biologic  behavior  and  have  been  the  subject  of  numerous  studies.  Unfortunately,  an 
understanding  of  the  biological  significance  of  these  features  is  still  lacking.  Previous 
studies  have  been  limited  by  small  study  size,  retrospective  analysis,  lack  of  defined 
guidelines  for  the  assessment  of  individual  pathologic  features,  and  lack  of  quality 
control.  Besides  employing  different  approaches  to  the  analysis  of  pathologic  features, 
these studies have employed different staging systems. Since tumor stage is the strongest 
prognostic indicator in colorectal cancer, all other factors of possible importance must be 
analyzed  against  staging  parameters  in  order  to  demonstrate  independent  prognostic 
value.  Overall,  therefore,  the  prognostic  significance  of  many  of  the  most  familiar  and 
widely  reported  pathologic  variables  in  colorectal  cancer  is  unclear  and  remains  to  be 
defined by prospective studies with the statistical power of the proposed investigations (1). 
The  studies  described  herein  have  the  additional  advantages  of  the  use  of  an 
internationally  accepted  staging  system  (the  TNM  staging  system  of  the  American  Joint 
Committee  on  Cancer  and  the  International  Union  Against  Cancer)  (2)  and  standards  of 
pathological evaluation proposed by the College of American Pathologists (3,4), which will 
be provided to all participating pathologists by the CALGB. The evaluations will be quality 
controlled  by  an  expert  gastrointestinal  pathologist  under  the  auspices  of  the  Pathology 
Committee of the CALGB. 

In this study, pathology reports will be submitted along with the representative blocks of 
tumor  from  each  patient  enrolled  to  the  CALGB  Pathology  Coordinating  Office  (PCO). 
Three  H&E  slides  (top,  middle  and  bottom)  will  be  prepared  from  each  block  of  tumor 
tissue  submitted.  These  are  prepared  routinely,  according  to  PCO  standard  practice,  for 
purposes  of  quality  control  in  order  to:  1)  check  the  accuracy  of  the  diagnosis;  2)  check 
that  the  tumor  in  the  block  submitted  is  representative  of  the  tumor  described  in  the 
pathology  report;  and  3)  check  that  representative  tumor  is  present  in  all  three  of  the 
tissue levels cut from the blocks (which, in turn, guarantees that all unstained sections in 
between  also  contain  representative  tumor  for  correlative  science  studies).  Dr.  Carolyn 
Compton, a gastrointestinal pathologist who is the designated study pathologist from the 
CALGB  Pathology  Committee  and  GI  Pathology  Cadre,  will  read  these  slides  for  quality 
control  and  assessment  of  tumor  grade  and  proliferative  index.  Other  histopathologic 
features of possible prognostic significance will be assessed by the submitting pathologist 
according to the CALGB GI Adjuvant on study form. The individual pathologic features to 
be assessed in this study are detailed below. 

1 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

2.0  PATHOLOGIC  FEATURES  TO  BE  EVALUATED  FROM  H&E  SLIDES  OF  SUBMITTED  TUMOR 

BLOCKS 

2.1  Tumor Grade 

A  number  of  grading  systems  for  colorectal  carcinoma  have  been  proposed  in  the 
literature,  but  a  single  widely  accepted,  uniformly  employed  standard  for  grading  is 
lacking.  Among  the  suggested  grading  schemas,  both  the  number  of  grades  and  the 
criteria  for  distinguishing  among  them  vary  markedly.  In  some  systems,  grade  is 
defined  on  the  basis  of  a  single  microscopic  feature,  such  as  the  degree  of  gland 
formation. In other systems, a large number of histopathologic features are included 
in  the  evaluation.  Irrespective  of  the  complexity  of  the  criteria,  however,  most 
systems stratify tumors into three or four grades as follows:  

Grade 1 - Well differentiated 

Grade 2 - Moderately differentiated 

Grade 3- Poorly differentiated 

(Grade 4- Undifferentiated) 

Ultimately,  however,  histologic  grading  is  largely  subjective  and  is  associated  with  a 
significant degree of interobserver variability (5,6).  

Despite  these  issues,  histologic  grade  has  repeatedly  been  shown  to  be  an 
independent prognostic factor on multivariate analysis (7-20). In specific, it has been 
demonstrated  that  high  tumor  grade  is  an  adverse  prognostic  factor.  In  the  vast 
majority of studies documenting the prognostic power of tumor grade, the number of 
grades  has  been  collapsed,  and  a  two-tiered  stratification  schema  (i.e.,  high  grade 
and  low  grade)  has  been  employed  for  data  analysis.  In  the  two-tiered  systems,  low 
grade  has 
included  both  well  differentiated  and  moderately  differentiated 
adenocarcinomas,  and  high  grade  has 
included  poorly  differentiated  and 
undifferentiated cancers. In general practice, a two-tiered grading systems would also 
be expected to reduce interobserver variability, since the widest variations in grading 
occur  with  stratification  of  low  grade  tumors  into  well-  or  moderately-differentiated 
categories  and  diagnosis  of  poorly  differentiated  or  undifferentiated  tumors  is  more 
consistent (21). In light of its proven prognostic value as well as its relative simplicity 
and  reproducibility,  the  use  of  a  two-tiered  grading  system  for  colorectal  carcinoma 
would be advisable but, unfortunately, is not common practice.  

It  has  also  been  demonstrated  that  RER+  colorectal  cancers  tend  to  be  less  well 
differentiated than RER- tumors. Thus, it may be possible to recognize RER+ on the 
basis of their degree of differentiation. 

In this study, all tumors will be graded according to a two-tiered system as either low 
grade  or  high  grade.  Correlation  with  outcome  will  be  established  by  multivariate 
analysis to determine the independent prognostic significance of tumor grade in stage 
II  colorectal  cancer,  high-risk  stage  II  colorectal  cancer  and  stage  III  disease, 
respectively.  In  addition,  correlation  with  other  parameters  such  as  RER  status  will 
be assessed. 

2.2  Tumor Proliferation Index 

Cell  proliferation  is  considered  an  indicator  of  colorectal  tumor  progression  (22,23). 
The  proliferative  index  of  colorectal  tumors  has  been  studied  almost  exclusively  by 
immunolocalization of cell cycle-related antigens such as Ki-67 and proliferating cell 
nuclear antigen (PCNA) (24-28) and by flow cytometry (29-33). The results of studies 
correlating proliferative indices determined by either method with clinical outcome or 
with  tumor  stage  or  grade  have  been  contradictory.  The  immunolocalization  studies 

2 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

for  Ki-67  have  shown  no  correlation  with  survival  (26,27),  but  it  subsequently  has 
been demonstrated that Ki-67 is also expressed in noncycling cells (34), a fact that is 
likely to skew results significantly. By contrast, studies using immunolocalization for 
PCNA  have  shown  that  proliferation  indices  are  independent  predictors  of  tumor 
recurrence  and  poor  survival  (24,25).  Correlation  of  outcome  with  proliferation 
indices  determined  by  flow  cytometry  have  also  been  contradictory,  ranging  from 
strong  correlation  with  adverse  outcome  (33)  to  no  correlation  at  all  with  outcome 
(30). 

The practice of assessing tumor proliferation by mitotic figure counts (i.e., number of 
mitotic figures per 10 high power fields) is commonplace with regard to sarcomas. In 
fact,  it  is  the  standard  method  by  which  tumor  proliferation  is  determined  and  by 
which  histologic  grade  assigned  in  most  sarcomas.  By  contrast,  mitotic  figure 
counting  is  rarely,  if  ever  performed  for  carcinomas.  Historically,  mitotic  density 
determination  fell  out  of  favor  as  a  method  of  choice  for  estimating  proliferation 
indices  for  colorectal  cancer  after  the  1930s.  However,  it  has  been  the  subject  of 
recent  studies  (35)  and  found  to  correlate  well  with  PCNA  staining,  but  it  is  not 
widely  practiced.  Recently,  the  subject  of  mitotic  indices  as  a  method  for  estimating 
proliferation rates in colorectal cancer was revisited by the Colorectal Working Group 
of the AJCC (1). Although little data on this method currently exists, the consensus of 
the  group  was  that  the  method  held  great  promise  in  that  it  is  inexpensive, 
reproducible,  universally  available,  easy  to  quality  control,  and  correlates  with  data 
derived  by  more  complex  and  expensive  methods.  Furthermore,  it  can  be  performed 
prospectively  or  retrospectively  with  equal  accuracy.  If  shown  to  be  prognostically 
significant,  mitotic  counting  would  be  justified  as  a  part  of  the  basic  pathologic 
analysis in all cases of colorectal cancer.  

In  this  study,  mitotic  counts  will  be  performed  on  all  three  of  the  H&E  sections 
produced  by  the  CALGB  PCO  for  each  tumor  in  these  studies.  The  average  of  the 
three  counts  will  be  calculated  as  the  mitotic  index  and  the  mitotic  index  will  be 
correlated with outcome. 

3.0  PATHOLOGIC  DATA  COLLECTED  BY  THE  SUBMITTING  PATHOLOGIST  ACCORDING  TO 

CALGB GUIDELINES 

3.1  Tumor Border Configuration  

For colorectal cancer,  the growth pattern of the tumor at the advancing edge (tumor 
border)  has been shown to have prognostic  significance that  is independent  of stage 
and  may  predict  liver  metastasis.  Specifically,  an  irregular,  infiltrating  pattern  of 
growth,  as  opposed  to  a  pushing  border,  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  an  adverse 
prognostic  factor  by  several  univariate  (21,36-38)  and  multivariate  analyses  (39-45). 
In  some  of  these  studies,  infiltrating  tumor  borders  have  been  referred  to  as  "focal 
dedifferentiation"  (38)  and  "tumor  budding"  (44)  and  defined  as microscopic clusters 
of  undifferentiated  cancer  cells  just  ahead  of  the  invasive  front  of  the  tumor.  In  a 
study  by  Jass  et  al.  (40),  interobserver  variability  among  pathologists  evaluating 
tumor  border  configuration  was  found  to  be  about  30%  if  no  specific  definitions  of 
infiltrating  growth  were  provided.  Concordance  was  found  to  improve  to  90%  when 
the  following  diagnostic  criteria  were  employed  (40):  1)  inability  to  define  limits  of 
invasive  border  of  tumor  and/or  to  resolve  host  tissue  from  malignant  tissue  on 
naked  eye  examination  of  the  slide;  and  2)  “streaming”  of  tumor  through  the  full 
thickness  of  the  muscularis  propria  without  stromal  response  and/or  dissection  of 
mesenteric  adipose  tissue  by  small  glands  or  irregular  clusters  or  cords  of  cells 
and/or perineural invasion on microscopic examination. 

In  this  study  tumor  border  configuration  will  be  analyzed  according  to  the  above 
criteria  by  the  submitting  pathologist.  The  guidelines  and  rational  for  tumor  border 
evaluation  are  detailed  in  the  CALGB  Pathology  Practice  Protocol  for  Colorectal 

3 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

Cancer which is provided to all participating institutions and is included in Appendix 
III. The tumor border will be assessed as either infiltrating or pushing. Tumor border 
configuration  will  be  correlated  with  outcome  to  determine  the  independent 
prognostic significance of this feature. 

3.2  Peritumoral Host Lymphoid Response  

Lymphocytic  infiltration  of  tumor  or  peritumoral  tissue  is  indicative  of  a  host 
immunologic  response  and  has  been  shown  by  multivariate  analysis  in  several 
studies to be a favorable prognostic factor (13,21,40,43). However, other studies have 
either failed to confirm the prognostic significance of a peritumoral lymphoid reaction 
(39,45)  or  have  demonstrated  its  significance  only  by  univariate analysis (36,46-48). 
The specific features that are considered indicative of a host immunologic reaction to 
tumor 
in  the  muscularis  propria, 
perivascular  lymphocytic  cuffing  in  the  pericolonic  fat  or  subserosa,  lymphocytic 
infiltration  at  the  tumor  edge,  and  a  "Crohn's-like"  lymphoid  reaction  (i.e., 
transmural peritumoral lymphoid follicle formation).  

include  perivascular 

lymphocytic  cuffing 

In  this  study  the  peritumoral  host  lymphoid  response  will  be  analyzed  by  the 
submitting  pathologist.  The  guidelines  and  rational  for  evaluation  of  the  host 
lymphoid  response  are  detailed  in  the  CALGB  Pathology  Practice  Protocol  for 
Colorectal Cancer which is provided to all participating institutions and is included in 
Appendix  III.  Peritumoral  host  lymphoid  response  will  be  assessed  as  either  present 
or  absent  and  will  be  correlated  with  outcome  to  determine  the  independent 
prognostic significance of the presence (or absence) of this feature. 

3.3  Lymphatic Vessel, Venous Vessel and Perineural Invasion 

Venous  invasion  by  tumor  has  been  demonstrated  to  have  an  independent  adverse 
impact  on  outcome  by  multivariate  analysis  in  at  least  10  different  studies  (7,10-
12,20,21,49-51,53)  and  by  univariate  analysis  in  several  additional  studies  (36,53-
55).  However,  some  studies  identifying  venous  invasion  as  an  adverse  prognostic 
factor  on  univariate  analysis  have  failed  to  confirm  an  independent  effect  on 
multivariate  analysis  (56,57).  Similarly  disparate  results  have  been  reported  for 
lymphatic invasion as well (14,37,49,50,52,54,56-58). Further complicating the issue, 
several multivariate analyses demonstrating vascular invasion to be a prognostically 
significant factor have made no distinction between lymphatic and venous vessels. In 
yet  other  studies,  the  location  of  the  vascular  involvement  (e.g.,  invasion  of 
extramural  veins)  has  been  a  strong  determinate  of  the  associated  prognostic 
significance  (5,21).  Perineural  invasion  has  been  shown  to  be  an  independent 
indicator  of  poor  prognosis  in  some  studies  (7,10,14,50,52,59,60)  but  not  in  others. 
Overall,  the  prognostic  importance  of  these  features  is  strongly  suggested  by  the 
literature but remains to be confirmed by definitive prospective analysis. 

In  this  study,  lymphatic,  venous,  and  perineural  invasion  will  be  analyzed  by  the 
submitting  pathologist.  The  guidelines  and  rational  for  evaluation  of  these  features 
are detailed in the CALGB Pathology Practice Protocol for Colorectal Cancer which is 
provided  to  all  participating  institutions  and  is  included  in  Appendix  III.  Each  of 
these features will be assessed as either present or absent and will be correlated with 
outcome to determine their independent prognostic significance. 

4.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Power estimates are presented for the primary endpoint of overall survival. The following 
pathologic  features  will  be  studied:  tumor  grade;  tumor  mitotic  index;  tumor  border 
configuration;  host  lymphoid  response  to  tumor;  lymphatic  vessel,  venous  vessel  and 
perineural invasion. 

4 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

Each  pathologic  feature  will  be  analyzed  separately  for  an  association  with  survival.  The 
expected  five-year  survival  in  this  population  of  patients  with  resected  Stage  II  colon 
cancer  is  85%  (median  21.3  years).  Power  calculations  are  presented  in  Tables  1  and  2 
below  to  detect  differences  in  median  survival  between  16.45  years  and  24.67  years 
(hazard  ratio  1.5)  and  18.6  years  and  27.9  years  (hazard  ratio  1.5)  at  three  prevalence 
levels  for  the  pathologic  variable:  10%,  30%  and  50%.  Similarly,  Tables  3  and  4  contain 
power  estimates  to  detect  differences  in  median  survival  between  16.45  years  and  27.9 
years  (hazard  ratio  1.7)  and  18.6  years  and  31.6  years  (hazard  ratio  1.7).  All  power 
estimates  are  based  on  the  following  assumptions:  1)  accrual  of  430  patients  (or  322 
patients  at  75%  of  total  enrollment)  per  year  for  4  2/3  years;  2)  two  years  follow-up;  3) 
two-sided  log  rank  test;  4)  exponential  survival.  Power  estimates  are  provided  for 
significance levels of 0.01 and 0.05. The Cox Regression Model will also be used to study 
the simultaneous impact of these variables on survival. 

Table  1.  Power  estimates  to  detect  the  difference  in  median  survival  between  16.45  and 
24.67  years  (hazard  ratio  1.5)  for  prevalence  of  10,  30  and  50%  and  significance  levels 
0.01 and 0.05. Power for 75% total enrollment given in parentheses. 

Prevalence 

10% 

 

30% 

 

50% 

 

a  
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 

Power 

0.34 (0.24) 
0.58 (0.47) 
0.73 (0.57) 
0.89 (0.78) 
0.78 (0.62) 
0.92 (0.84) 

Table  2.  Power  estimates  to  detect  the  difference  in  median  survival  between  18.6  and 
27.9 years (hazard ratio1.5) for prevalence of 10, 30 and 50% and significance levels 0.01 
and 0.05. Power for 75% total enrollment given in parentheses. 

Prevalence 

10% 

 

30% 

 

50% 

 

a  
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 

Power 

0.30 (0.21) 
0.54 (0.43) 
0.67 (0.51) 
0.85 (0.74) 
0.72 (0.58) 
0.88 (0.79) 

 

 

 

 

5 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

 
Table  3.  Power  estimates  to  detect  the  difference  in  median  survival  between  16.45  and  27.9 
years (hazard ratio 1.7) for prevalence of 10, 30 and 50% and significance levels 0.01 and 0.05. 
Power for 75% total enrollment given in parentheses. 
 

 
Table  4.  Power  estimates  to  detect  the  difference  in  median  survival  between  18.6  and  31.6 
years (hazard ratio 1.7) for prevalence of 10, 30 and 50% and significance levels 0.01 and 0.05. 
Power for 75% total enrollment given in parentheses. 
 

Prevalence 

10% 

 

30% 

 

50% 

 

Prevalence 

10% 

 

30% 

 

50% 

 

 
 

 

a  
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 

a  
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 

Power 

0.59 (0.44) 
0.80 (0.68) 
0.93 (0.83) 
0.98 (0.94) 
0.95 (0.87) 
0.99 (0.96) 

Power 

0.53 (0.39) 
0.76 (0.63) 
0.90 (0.77) 
0.97 (0.91) 
0.92 (0.82) 
0.98 (0.94) 

6 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

REFERENCES 

1.  Compton  CC,  Fenoglio-Preiser  CM,  Pettigrew  N,  Fielding  LP.  American  Joint 
Committee on Cancer. Prognostic factors consensus conference: Colorectal Working 
Group. Cancer (manuscript submitted to Cancer). 

2. 

Fleming ID, Cooper JS, Henson DE, et al. eds., AJCC Manual for Staging of Cancer, 
5th ed, Lippincott Raven, Philadelphia, 1997. 

3.  Compton  CC,  Henson  DE,  Hutter  RVP,  et  al.  Protocol  for  the  Examination  of 
Specimens Removed from Patients with Colorectal Carcinoma. Arch Pathol Lab Med 
121;1247-54, 1998. 

4.  Compton  CC,  Sobin  LH.  Carcinoma  of  the  Stomach.  In:  Compton  CC,  editor. 
Practice  Protocol  Manual  for  the  Examination of Specimens Removed from Patients 
with Cancer. 1st Edition. Northfield (IL): College of American Pathologists, 1998. 

5.  Blenkinsopp  W,  Stewart-Brown  S,  Blesovsky  L,  et  al.  Histopathology  reporting  in 

large bowel cancer. J Clin Pathol 34:509-513, 1981. 

6. 

Thomas  GHD,  Dixon  MF,  Smeeton  NC,  et  al.  Observer  variation  in  the  histological 
grading of rectal carcinoma. J Clin Pathol 36:385-391, 1983. 

7.  Chapuis  PH,  Dent  OF,  Fisher  R,  et  al.  A  multivariate  analysis  of  clinical  and 
pathological  variables  in  prognosis  after  resection  of  large  bowel  cancer.  Br  J  Surg 
72:698-702, 1985. 

8.  D’Eredita  G,  Serio  G,  Neri  V,  et  al.  A  survival  regression  analysis  of  prognostic 

factors in colorectal cancer. Aust NZ J Surg 66:445-451, 1996. 

9.  Griffin M, Bergstralh E, Coffey R, et al. Predictors of survival after curative resection 

of carcinoma of the colon and rectum. Cancer 60:2318-2324, 1987. 

10.  Mulcahy  HE,  Skelly  MM,  Husain  A,  et  al.  Long-term  outcome  following  curative 

surgery for malignant large bowel obstruction. Br J Surg 83:46-50, 1996. 

11.  Newland  R,  Dent  O,  Lyttle  M,  et  al.  Pathologic  determinants  of  survival  associated 
with  colorectal  cancer  with  lymph  node  metastases.  A  multivariate  analysis  of  579 
patients. Cancer 73:2076-2082, 1994. 

12.  Freedman  L,  Macaskill  P,  Smith  A.  Multivariate  analysis  of  prognostic  factors  for 

operable rectal cancer. Lancet II:733-736, 1984 

13.  Deans  G,  Heatley  M,  Anderson  N,  et  al.  Jass  Classification  Revisited.  J.  Am.  Coll. 

Surg. 179:11-17, 1994. 

14.  Hermanek  P,  Guggenmoos-Holzmann  I,  Gall  FP.  Prognostic  factors  in  rectal 
carcinoma.  A  contribution  to  the  further  development  of  tumor  classification.  Dis 
Colon Rectum 32:593-599, 1989. 

15.  Robey-Cafferty SS, el-Naggar AK, Grignon DJ, et al. Histologic parameters and DNA 
ploidy as predictors of survival in stage B adenocarcinoma of colon and rectum. Mod 
Pathol 3:261-266, 1990. 

7 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

16.  Böttger  TC,  Potratz  D,  Stöckle  M,  et  al.  Prognostic  value  of  DNA  analysis  in 

colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 72:3579-3587, 1993. 

17.  Fisher E, Sass R, Palekar A, et al. Dukes’ classification revisited. Findings from the 

National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Projects. Cancer 64:2354-2360, 1989. 

18.  Jessup  J,  McGinnis  L,  Steele  G,  et  al.  The  National  Cancer  Data  Base  Report  on 

Colon Cancer. Cancer 78:918-926, 1996. 

19.  Scott NA, Wieand HS, Moertel CG, et al. Colorectal cancer. Dukes’ stage, tumor site, 
preoperative  plasma  CEA  level,  and  patient  prognosis  related  to  tumor  DNA  ploidy 
pattern. Arch Surg 122:1375-1379, 1987. 

20.  Wiggers  T,  Arends  J,  Volovics  A.  Regression  analysis  of  prognostic  factors  in 

colorectal cancer after curative resections. Dis Colon Rectum 31:33-, 1988. 

21.  Harrison  J,  Dean  P,  El-Zeky  F,  et  al.  From  Dukes  through  Jass:  Pathological 

prognostic indicators in rectal cancer. Hum Pathol 25:498-505, 1994. 

22.  Risio M. Cell proliferation in colorectal tumor progression: an immunohistochemical 

approach to intermediate biomarkers. J Cell Biol 16G:79-87, 1992. 

23.  Moss  SF,  Liu  TC,  Petrotos  A,  et  al.  Inward  growth  of  colonic  adenomatous  polyps. 

Gastroenterology 111:1425-1432, 1996. 

24.  Mayer A, Takimoto M, Fritz E, et al. The prognostic significance of proliferating cell 
nuclear  antigen,  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor,  and  mdr  gene  expression  in 
colorectal cancer. Cancer 71:2454-2460, 1993. 

25.  Al-Sheneber  IF,  Shibata  HR,  Sampalis  J,  Jothy  S.  Prognostic  significance  of 
proliferating  cell  nuclear  antigen  expression  in  colorectal  cancer.  Cancer  71:1954-
1959, 1993. 

26.  Kubota  Y,  Petras  RE,  Easley  KA,  et  al.  Ki-67-determined  growth  fraction  versus 
standard staging and grading  parameters in colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 70:2602-
2609, 1992. 

27.  Sahin AA, Ro JY, Brown RW, et al. Assessment of Ki-67-derived tumor proliferation 

activity in colorectal adenocarcinomas. Mod Pathol 7:17-22, 1994. 

28.  Neoptolemos  JP,  Oates  KM,  Newbold  KM,  et  al.  Cyclin/proliferation  cell  nuclear 
antigen  immunohistochemistry  does  not  improve  the  power  of  Dukes’  or  Jass’ 
classifications for colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 82:184-187, 1995. 

29.  Rew  DA,  Wilson  GD,  Taylor  I,  Weaver  PC.  Proliferation  characteristics  of  human 

colorectal carcinomas measured in vitro. Br J Surg 78:60-66, 1991. 

30.  Bleiberg  H,  Buyes  M,  Van  den  Heule  B,  Galand  P.  Cell  cycle  parameters  and 

prognosis of colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer Clin Oncol 20:391-396, 1984. 

31.  Enker WE, Kimmel M, Cibas ES, et al. DNA/RNA content and proliferative fractions 
of  colorectal  carcinomas:  A  five-year  prospective  study  relating  flow  cytometry  to 
survival. JNCI 83:701-707, 1991. 

8 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

32.  Wahlstrom  B,  Branehog  I,  Stierner  U,  et  al.  Association  of  ploidy  and  cell 
in 

proliferation,  Dukes’  classification,  and  histopathological  differentiation 
adenocarcinomas of colon and rectum. Eur J Surg 158:237-243, 1992. 

33.  Witzig  TE, Loprinzi CL, Gonchoroff NJ, et al. DNA ploidy and cell measurements as 
predictors  of  recurrence  and  survival  in  stages  B2  and  C  adenocarcinoma.  Cancer 
68:879-888, 1991. 

34.  Van Oijen MGCT, Medema RH, Slootweg PJ, Rijken G. Positivity of the proliferation 

marker Ki-67 in noncycling cells. Am J Clin Pathol 110:24-31, 1998. 

35.  Willett CG, Warland G, Cheek R, et al. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and 
mitotic  activity  in  rectal  cancer:  predictor  of  response  to  preoperative  irradiation.  J 
Clin Oncol  12:679-82, 1994. 

36.  Carlon  C,  Fabris  G,  Arslan-Pagnini  C,  et  al.  Prognostic  correlations  of  operable 

carcinoma of the rectum. Dis Colon Rectum 28:47-50, 1985. 

37.  Minsky  B,  Mies  C,  Rich  T,  Recht  A.  Lymphatic  vessel  invasion  in  an  independent 
prognostic  factor  for  survival  in  colorectal  cancer.  Int  J  Radiation  Oncology  Biol 
Phys 17:311-318, 1989. 

38.  Ono M, Sakamoto M, Ino Y, et al. Cancer cell morphology at the invasive front and 
expression  of  cell  adhesion-related  carbohydrate  in  the  primary  lesion  of  patients 
with colorectal carcinoma with liver metastasis. Cancer 78:1179-1186, 1996. 

39.  Roncucci  L,  Fante  R,  Losi  L,  et  al.  Survival  for  colon  and  rectal  cancer  in  a 

population-based cancer registry. Eur J Cancer 32A:295-302, 1996. 

40.  Jass  JR,  Atkin  W,  Cuzick  J,  et  al.  The  grading  of  rectal  cancer:  historical 
perspectives  and  a  multivariate  analysis  of  447  cases.  Histopathology  10:437-459, 
1986. 

41.  Jass  JR,  Love  S,  Northover  J.  A  new  prognostic  classification  of  rectal  cancer. 

Lancet I:1303-1306, 1987. 

42.  Shepherd  N,  Saraga  E,  Love  S,  Jass  JR.  Prognostic  factors  in  colonic  cancer. 

Histopathology 14:613-620, 1989. 

43.  Desmoplasia and survival in colorectal cancer. J Clin Pathol 42:162-166, 1989. 

44.  Hase  K,  Shatney  C,  Johnson  D,  et  al.  Prognostic  value  of  tumor  “budding”  in 

patients with colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 36:627-635, 1993. 

45.  Thynne  GS,  Weiland  LH,  Moertel  CG,  Silvers  A.  Correlation  of  histopathologic 
characteristics  of  primary  tumor  and uninvolved regional lymph nodes in Dukes’ C 
colonic carcinoma with prognosis. Mayo Clin Proc 55:243-245, 1980. 

46.  Pihl  E,  Malahy  MA,  Khankhanian  N,  et  al.  Immunomorphological  features  of 
prognostic  significance  in  Dukes’  class  B  colorectal  carcinoma.  Cancer  Res. 
37:4145-4149, 1977. 

47.  Svennevig JL, Lunde OC, Holter J, Bjørgsvik D. Lymphoid infiltration and prognosis 

in colorectal carcinoma. Br J Cancer 49:375-377, 1984. 

9 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX VIII 

48.  Zhou  XG,  Yu  BM,  Shen  YX.  Surgical  treatment  and  late  results  in  1226  cases  of 

colorectal cancer. Dis Colon Rectum 26:250-256, 1983. 

49.  Michelassi  F,  Ayala  J,  Balestracci  T,  et  al.  Verification  of  a  new  clinicopathologic 

staging system for colorectal adenocarcinoma. Ann Surg 214:11-18, 1991. 

50.  Michelassi  F,  Block  GE,  Vannucci  L,  Montag A,  Chappell R. A 5- to 21-year follow-
up  and  analysis  of  250  patients  with  rectal  adenocarcinoma.  Ann.  Surg.  208:379-
387, 1988. 

51.  Heys S, Sherif A, Bagley J, et al. Prognostic factors and survival of patients aged less 

than 45 years with colorectal cancer. Br J Surg 81:685-688, 1994. 

52.  Knudsen JB, Nilsson T, Sprechler M, et al. Venous and nerve invasion as prognostic 
factors  in  postoperative  survival  of  patients  with  resectable  cancer  of  the  rectum. 
Dis Colon Rectum 26:613-617, 1983. 

53.  Horn A, Dahl O, Morild I. Venous and neural invasion as predictors of recurrence in 

rectal adenocarcinoma. Dis Colon Rectum 34:798-804, 1991. 

54.  Lee  Y.  Local  and  regional  recurrence  of  carcinoma  of  the  colon  and  rectum:  I. 

tumour-host factors and adjuvant therapy. Surg Oncol 4:283-293, 1995. 

55.  Talbot I, Ritchie  S, Leighton MH, et al. The clinical significance of invasion of veins 

by rectal cancer. Br J Surg 67:439-442, 1980. 

56.  Takebayashi  Y,  Akiyama  S,  Yamada  K,  et  al.  Angiogenesis  as  an  unfavorable 

prognostic factor in human colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 78:226-31, 1996. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10 of 10 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

EORTC Administrative Appendix  

 
 
 

11/15/04 
 

 

 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 

 
EORTC Data Center 
Av. E. Mounier 83/11 
1200 Brussels, Belgium 
Direct phone: + 32 2 774 16 11 
Fax: + 32 2 772 35 45 

Administrative Appendix 
for EORTC protocol 40991 

 

Phase III Randomized Study of Adjuvant Immunotherapy with Monoclonal 

Antibody 17-1A versus no Adjuvant Therapy Following Resection for Stage II 

(Modified Astler Coller B2) Adenocarcinoma of the Colon  

(CALGB 9581 Intergroup Protocol) 

 
This appendix is applicable to all EORTC investigators participating in EORTC 40991.  

 

 

It should be used in conjunction with CALGB 9581/EORTC 40991 protocol 

whenever more detailed administrative information is needed. 

This appendix does not supersede the protocol. Please always refer to the protocol first, before 

seeking further details in this appendix. 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

Table of Contents 

1 

2 

3 

4 

INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................................................... 4 

THERAPEUTIC REGIMENS ................................................................................................................... 4 

2.1  SUPPLY OF STUDY DRUG ...................................................................................................................... 4 
2.2  DRUG ACCOUNTABILITY ....................................................................................................................... 4 
2.3  DESTRUCTION OF UNUSED MATERIALS………………………………………………………………….15 

FORMS AND PROCEDURES FOR COLLECTING DATA ................................................................. 4 

3.1  DATA FLOW ............................................................................................................................................. 4 

QUALITY ASSURANCE ........................................................................................................................... 5 

4.1  ON-SITE QUALITY CONTROL ................................................................................................................. 5 
4.2  CONTROL OF DATA CONSISTENCY ....................................................................................................... 6 

5 

ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................................................................... 6 

5.1  PATIENT PROTECTION ............................................................................................................................ 6 
5.2  SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION ..................................................................................................................... 6 

INFORMED CONSENT ............................................................................................................................ 6 

INVESTIGATOR COMMITMENT STATEMENT ............................................................................... 6 

ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES ............................................................................................. 7 

TRIAL SPONSORSHIP/FINANCING ..................................................................................................... 7 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10  TRIAL INSURANCE ................................................................................................................................. 8 

11  PUBLICATION POLICY .......................................................................................................................... 8 

 

DECLARATION OF HELSINSKI ..................................................................................................................... 9 

COMMITMENT STATEMENT FOR INTERGROUP TRIALS WITH US PARTICIPANTS ................. 13 

TEMPLATE OF INFORMED CONSENT DOCUMENT.............................................................................. 14 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 
Introduction 
EORTC  40991  protocol  is  the  EORTC-specific  version  of  the  CALGB  9581 intergroup protocol. 
The  leading  group  of  this  intergroup  protocol  is  CALGB.  Other  co-operative  groups,  including 
EORTC,  act  as  a  link  between  investigators  and  CALGB.  In  order  to  accommodate  for  both 
CALGB's  and  EORTC's  requirements,  investigators  should  take  special  notice  at  the 
procedures  outlined  in  this  appendix.  While  generally  the  usual  EORTC  data  flow  contacts 
and  procedures  still  apply,  there  are  important  additional  instructions  to  follow  on  several 
administrative  procedures.  This  applies  in  particular  to  Case  Report  Forms  (chapter  3.1)  and 
Quality Assurance (chapter 4). 
For  any  questions  or  concerns  related  to  any  information  contained  in  this  appendix,  please 
refer to your EORTC GITCCG Study Coordinators, Group Contacts or the EORTC Data Center 
Contacts listed on first page. 
 
Therapeutic regimens 

Supply of Study Drug 

The study drug Panorex(cid:211)
 will be supplied free of charge by the manufacturer. Supplies will be 
handled centrally and dispatched to the pharmacy of individual institutions by SGS Biopharma 
S.A.,  Belgium.  EORTC  will  coordinate  all  drug  requests  for  Panorex(cid:211)
  to  the  Pharmaceutical 
Management  Branch,  (PNB)  National  Cancer  Institute,  on  behalf  of  the  EORTC  participating 
institutions.  Final  shipping  approval  of  study  supplies  is  to be directed by the  PMB. Once  the 
site  is  approved,  the  EORTC  will  order  a  starter  supply  from  PMB.  Later  on,  the  EORTC  will 
reorder  additional  supplies  as  needed  from  PMB.  PMB  will  authorize  SGS  Biopharma  S.A.  to 
ship Panorex(cid:211)
, sodium  chloride, and filters to each participating institution. On receipt of the 
shipment, investigators will be asked to confirm safe receipt of the shipment to SGS Biopharma 
S.A.,  who  will  then  inform  EORTC.  This  implies  that  an  authorized  person  (Institution 
Pharmacist)  will  check  that  Panorex(cid:211)
  has  clearly  remained  within  the  2°  to  8°  range  during 
shipment. Please note that PMB does not permit the transfer of supplies between sites. 
For any communication or information related to supply of the  study  drug, please refer to the 
EORTC Data Center Trial 40991 Administrator: 
EORTC Trial 40991 Administrator 

Drug accountability 
The  person  responsible  for  drug  dispensing  is  required  to  maintain  adequate  records  of  all 
treatment drugs. For Panorex(cid:211)
, these records (e.g. drug movement form) include the dates the 
study  medications  are  received  from  the  manufacturer,  dispensed to the patient and returned 
to the manufacturer (if applicable).  

Forms and procedures for collecting data 

Data flow 

The  case  report  forms  must  be  completed  and  signed  by  the  investigator  or  one  of  his/her 
authorized  staff  members  as  soon  as  the  requested  information  is  available,  according  to  the 
described schedule in section 4.3 of the protocol. 
The list of staff members authorized to sign case report forms (with a sample of their signature) 
must be sent to the EORTC Data Center by the responsible investigators before the start of the 
study. 
In  all  cases,  it  remains  the  responsibility  of  the  investigator  to  check  that original case  report 
forms are sent to the EORTC Data Center and that they are completely and correctly filled out. 
The original copy must be immediately returned to the EORTC Data Center and a copy must be 
kept by the investigator. 
The  EORTC  Data  Center  will  forward  the  CRF's  to  the  CALGB  Data  Management  Center  on  a 
regular basis. 
CALGB will perform extensive consistency checks on the CRFs and issue Query Forms in case 
of  inconsistent  data.  Those  Query  Forms  will  be  sent  to  the  investigator  via  the  EORTC  Data 
Center  and  must  be  immediately  answered  and  signed  by  the  investigator  (or  an  authorized 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

staff  member).  The  original  must  be  returned  to  the  EORTC  Data  Center  and  a  copy  must  be 
appended to the investigator's copy of the CRFs. 
If an investigator (or an authorized staff member) needs to modify a CRF after the original copy 
has been returned to the EORTC Data Center, he/she should notify the EORTC Data Center in 
writing (and sign the notification) and append a copy of the notification to his own copy of the 
CRFs. 
The investigator's copy of the CRFs may not be modified unless modifications are reported on a 
Query Form (or a written and signed notification) and the Query Form (or notification) reference 
is indicated on the CRF. 

 Destruction of unused material:  

In  line  with  the  current European waste and transport regulations,  all unused vials, returned 
or  rejected  clinical  supplies  material  must  be  destroyed  at  the  investigator's  site  or  by  their 
third  party    operators.  Material  cannot  be  sent  to  GW  or their contractor for destruction. Full 
accountability must be performed at the site prior to the destruction of any material and copies 
of all destructions must be sent to the EORTC to then be forwarded to PMB. 

Quality assurance 

On-site Quality Control 

This  protocol  will  be  carried  out  under  the  International  Cooperative  Project  Assurance  (ICPA) 
in  conjunction  with  the  US  Office  for  the  Protection  of  Research  Risks  (OPRR)  and  the  Co-
operative Protocol Research Program (CPRP). The ICPA allows the EORTC to participate  in the 
CPRP  and  covers  all  NCI  funded  Co-operative  Group  protocols as well as  protocols using NCI-
sponsored IND agents.  
The  ICPA  Committee  is  an  EORTC  Central  Ethics  Committee  constituted  of  medical/scientific 
professionals  and  non-medical/non-scientific  members.  Their  responsibility  is  to  ensure  the 
protection  of  the  rights,  safety  and  well-being  of  human  subjects  involved  in  Co-operative 
Protocol  Research  Program  trials.  The  Committee  is  guided  by the ethical principles regarding 
research  involving  human  subjects  set  forth  in  the  Belmont  Report  and  the  Declaration  of 
Helsinki.  These ethical principles guide the institution in the conduct of all its human subjects’ 
research.  The  Committee  is  focusing  on  the  ethical  aspects  of  intergroup  trials,  taking  into 
account the existing social cultural differences between countries and addressing safety issues 
there  with safeguarding the integrity of subjects participating to studies. The ICPA also has to 
provide  public  assurance  of  that  protection  by  approving  the  suitability  of  the  investigators, 
facilities  and  the  methods  and  materials  to  be  used  in  obtaining  and  documenting  informed 
consent of the trial subjects.   
Each protocol must include a template for patient information and informed consent form that 
adheres to the ICH-GCP guidelines (CPMP/ICH/135/95; September 1997; chapter 4.8.10) and to 
the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki. 
The  ICPA  Committee  has  the  dedicated  task  of  expressing  their  opinion  on  problems  in  the 
current  procedures  and  in  the  patient  information  sheet  and  /  or  informed  consent  template.  
The ICPA Committee can impose changes to the patient information and / or informed consent 
if necessary. 
The  expedited  review  committee  has  the  task  of  determining  if  a  protocol  amendment 
implements changes in the patient information sheet and / or informed consent template. 
Each  EORTC  institute  participating  in  the  ICPA  trial  should  translate  the  original  patient 
information  and  informed  consent  template,  approved  by  the  ICPA  Committee,  into  the 
local language.  Each responsible investigator is required to certify that the translations 
of the PIS / IC is conform to the original template. Any change in the PIS / IC translation 
must  be  reported  and  justified  to  the  ICPA  Committee.    This  will  be  done  through  the 
EORTC Data Manager. 
All participating institutes will be part of the EORTC audit program to verify the quality of the 
Institution  /  Department  with  regards  to  facilities  and  quality  of  data.  These  audits  will  be 
performed at least once every three years. 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

Control of data consistency 

Data  forms  will  be  entered  in  the  database  of  the  CALGB  Data  Management  Center. 
Computerized  and  manual  consistency  checks  will  be  performed  on  newly  entered  forms; 
queries will be issued in case of inconsistencies. Consistent forms will be validated by the Data 
Manager to be entered on the master database. Inconsistent forms will be kept "on-hold" until 
resolution of the inconsistencies. The EORTC Data Center will forward the forms to the CALGB 
Data  Management  Center  (i.e.,  the  forms  should  not  be  sent  by  the  investigator  to  CALGB 
Management Center directly) and vice versa, the EORTC Data Center  will forward any queries 
received to the Investigator. 

Ethical considerations 

Patient protection 

The  responsible  investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in agreement with either 
the Declaration of Helsinki (Tokyo, Venice, Hong Kong and Somerset West amendments) or the 
laws and regulations of the country, whichever provides the greatest protection of the patient. 
The  protocol  has  been  written  and  the  study  will  be  conducted  according  to  the  ICH 
Harmonised Tripartite Guideline for Good Clinical Practice. 
The protocol will by approved by the Local, Regional or National Ethics Committees. 

Subject identification 

The  name  of  the  patient  will  not  be  asked  for  nor  recorded  at  the  Data  Center.  EORTC  and 
CALGB  sequential  identification  numbers  will  be  automatically  attributed  to  each  patient 
registered in the trial. These numbers will identify the patient and must be included on all case 
report forms. In order to avoid identification errors, patient initials (maximum of 4 letters), date 
of birth and local chart number (if available) will also be reported on the case report forms. 

Informed consent 

All  patients  will  be  informed  of  the  aims  of  the  study,  the  possible  adverse  events,  the 
procedures  and  possible  hazards  to  which  he/she  will  be  exposed,  and  the  mechanism  of 
treatment allocation. They will be informed as to the strict confidentiality of their patient data, 
but  that  their  medical  records  may  be  reviewed  for  trial  purposes  by  authorized  individuals 
other  than  their  treating  physician.  An  example  of  a  patient  informed  consent  statement  is 
given as an appendix to this protocol. 
It  will  be  emphasized  that  the  participation  is  voluntary  and  that  the  patient  is  allowed  to 
refuse further participation in the protocol whenever he/she wants. This will not prejudice the 
patient’s  subsequent  care.  Documented  informed  consent  must  be  obtained  for  all  patients 
included in the study before they are registered at the EORTC Data Center. This must be done 
in accordance with the national and local regulatory requirements. 
For European Union member states, the informed consent procedure must conform to the ICH 
guidelines  on  Good  Clinical  Practice.  This  implies  that  "the  written  informed  consent  form 
should  be  signed  and  personally  dated  by  the  patient  or  by  the  patient’s  legally  acceptable 
representative".  

Investigator commitment statement 

Investigators  will  be  authorized  to  register  or  randomize  patients  in  this  trial  only  when  they 
have returned to the EORTC Data Center: 
•  a  commitment  form,  indicating  that  they  will  fully  comply  with  the protocol, to include an 
estimate  of  their  yearly  accrual  and  if  any  conflict  of  interest  may  arrive  due  to  their 
participation  in  the  trial.  This  commitment  implies  that  the  EORTC  International 
Cooperative Project Assurance (ICPA) policies will be followed (see section 4.1). 

•  a copy of the letter of acceptance of the protocol by their local ethics committee. 
•  a  signed  conflict  of  interest  disclosure  form:  this  document  will  be  required  only  if  a 

possible conflict is declared by the commitment form.  

and, if the following documents are not yet available at the Data Center: 
• 
• 

their updated Curriculum Vitae. 
the list of the normal ranges, in their own institution, of all laboratory data required by the 
protocol. 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

• 

the  list of  their  staff members authorized  to  sign case  report forms, with a sample of each 
authorized signature. 

As soon as all the documents have been received at the Data Center, the new investigator will 
be  added  to  the  "authorization  list",  and  will  be  allowed  to  register/randomize  patients  in  the 
trial.  Patient  registration/randomization  from  centers  not  (yet)  included  on  the  authorization 
list will not be accepted. 

Administrative responsibilities 

CALGB  will  be  responsible  for  writing  the  protocol,  reviewing  all  case  report  forms  and 
documenting review on evaluation forms, discussing the contents of the reports with the Data 
Manager  and  the  Statistician,  and  for  publishing  the  study  results.  The  EORTC  study 
coordinators  will  also  generally  be  responsible  for  answering  all  clinical  questions  concerning 
eligibility, treatment, and the evaluation of the patients. 
EORTC Study Coordinators: 
Dr. Jose GUIMARAES DOS SANTOS 
I.P.O. DO PORTO 
rua Dr. A. Bernardino de Almeida 
P-4200 PORTO, Portugal 
Fax +351 2 5502745 
 
Pr. Philippe ROUGIER 
CHU AMBROISE PARE 
Sce Gastro-Entérologie 
9 avenue Charles de Gaulle 
F-92104 BOULOGNE-BILLANCOURT CEDEX, France 
Fax +33   149095327 

 

The  EORTC  Data  Center  will  be  responsible  for  reviewing  the  protocol,  collecting  case  report 
forms,  controlling  the  quality  of  the  reported  data,  and  generating  reports  and  analyses  in 
cooperation  with the Study Coordinators. All methodological questions should be addressed to 
the EORTC Data Center. 
EORTC DATA CENTER 
83, avenue Emmanuel Mounier, Bte 11 
B-1200 Brussels, Belgium 
Fax: +32 2 7723545 
Registration of patients:  
Tel +32 2 7741600 
or 
http://www.eortc.be/random 
 
 
All  questions  concerning  membership  in  the  cooperative  group  should  be  addressed  to  the 
chairman and/or secretary of the group. 

The Sponsor of the study carried out by EORTC Investigators is the EORTC. 
The Director General of the EORTC is: 

Trial Sponsorship/Financing 

Professor Françoise Meunier 
 
EORTC Central Office 

 
 

Avenue Mounier 83, Bte 11 
B-1200 Brussels, Belgium 

 
 

Tel: +32 2 7741641 
Fax: +32 2 7712004 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

Trial insurance 

The  EORTC  insurance  program  covers  all  patients  entered  on  behalf  of  EORTC  in  EORTC 
studies except patients from USA and Canada. 
Insurance within the European Union: 
•  When  specific  requirements  are  stated  in  the  national  laws  of  the  E.U.  countries,  the 

insurance program will take these requirements into account. 

•  For  countries where there  are no specific requirements, the EORTC provides an insurance 
coverage  which  is  valid  for  two  years  after  a  patient  has  completed  the  treatment  strategy 
being  studied  by  the  research  protocol.  This  insurance  program  covers  the  EORTC  as  the 
sponsor, the investigators and all local hospital staff. 

Insurance outside the European Union: 
•  The EORTC insurance program only covers claims against the EORTC as the sponsor in its 

role of coordinator of the research and not the investigators and local hospital staff.  

Publication policy 

The final publication of the trial results will be written by the Study Coordinator(s) on the basis 
of the statistical analysis performed at the CALGB Statistical Center. The statistical report will 
be sent to the EORTC study coordinators and statistician. A draft manuscript will be submitted 
by the study coordinator(s) to the EORTC Data Center for review no later than six months after 
receiving  the  report.  After  comments  from  the  Data  Center  and  other  co-authors  (and  the 
Sponsor,  if  applicable)  are  received,  the  manuscript  will  be  revised  and  sent  to  a  major 
scientific journal by the CALGB. 
Authorship of the manuscript will follow CALGB's publication policy. 
All  publications,  abstracts  or  presentations  including  data  from  the  present  trial  will  be 
submitted for review to the CALGB and EORTC Data Center prior to submission. 
Any  publication,  abstract  or  presentation  based  on  patients  included  in  this  study  must  be 
approved by the CALGB Group Chairman and the Study Coordinator. This is applicable to any 
individual  patient  registered/randomized  in  the  trial,  or  any  subgroup  of  the  trial  patients. 
Such  a  publication  cannot  include  any  comparisons  between  randomized  treatment  arms  nor 
an analysis of any of the study end-points unless the final results of the trial have already been 
published by the Study Coordinator. 
The  title  of  all  manuscripts  will  include  "EORTC",  and  all  manuscripts  will  include  an 
appropriate acknowledgment section, mentioning all investigators who have contributed to the 
trial, as well as supporting bodies (NCI, cancer leagues, sponsors…). 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

Declaration of Helsinski 

 
 

WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION DECLARATION OF HELSINKI 

Recommendations guiding physicians  

in biomedical research involving human subjects 

Adopted by the 18th World Medical Assembly 

Helsinki, Finland, June 1964 

 

 

and amended by the  

29th World Medical Assembly  
Tokyo, Japan, October 1975  
35th World Medical Assembly  

Venice, Italy, October 1983 

and the 

41st World Medical Assembly  
Hong Kong, September 1989 

and the 

Somerset West, Republic of South Africa, October 1996 

48th General Assembly, 

 

INTRODUCTION 
 
It  is  the  mission  of  the  physician  to  safeguard  the  health  of  the  people.  His  or  her  knowledge 
and conscience are dedicated to the fulfillment of this mission. 
 
The  Declaration  of  Geneva  of  the  World  Medical  Association  binds  the  physician  with  the 
words, "The health of my patient will be my first consideration," and the International Code of 
Medical  Ethics  declares  that,  "A  physician  shall  act  only  in  the  patient's  interest  when 
providing  medical  care  which  might  have  the  effect  of  weakening  the  physical  and  mental 
condition of the patient." 
 
The  purpose  of  biomedical  research  involving  human  subjects  must  be  to  improve  diagnostic, 
therapeutic  and  prophylactic  procedures  and  the  understanding  of  the  aetiology  and 
pathogenesis of disease. 
 
In  current  medical  practice  most  diagnostic,  therapeutic  or  prophylactic  procedures  involve 
hazards. This applies especially to biomedical research. 
 
Medical  process  is  based  on  research  which  ultimately  must  rest  in  part  on  experimentation 
involving human subjects. 
 
 
 
In  the  field  of  biomedical  research  a  fundamental  distinction  must  be  recognized  between 
medical  research  in  which  the  aim  is  essentially  diagnostic  or  therapeutic  for  a  patient,  and 
medical research, the essential object of which is purely scientific and without implying direct 
diagnostic or therapeutic value to the person subjected to the research. 
 
Special  caution  must  be  exercised  in  the  conduct  of  research  which  may  affect  the 
environment, and the welfare of animals used for research must be respected. 
 
Because it is essential that the results of laboratory experiments be applied to human beings to 
further scientific knowledge and to help suffering humanity, the World Medical Association has 
prepared  the  following  recommendations  as  a  guide  to  every  physician  in  biomedical  research 
involving human subjects. They should be kept under review in the future. It must be stressed 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

that the standards as drafted are only a guide to physicians all over the world. Physicians are 
not  relieved  from  criminal,  civil  and  ethical  responsibilities  under  the  laws  of  their  own 
countries. 
 
I. 
 

BASIC PRINCIPLES 

l. 

 
2.  

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 

 
7. 

 
8. 

 
9. 

Biomedical  research  involving  human  subjects  must  conform  to  generally 
accepted  scientific  principles  and  should  be  based  on  adequately  performed 
laboratory  and  animal  experimentation  and  on  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the 
scientific literature. 

The  design  and  performance  of  each  experimental  procedure  involving  human 
subjects should be clearly formulated in an experimental protocol which should 
be transmitted for consideration, comment and guidance to a specially appointed 
committee  independent  of  the  investigator  and  the  sponsor  provided  that  this 
independent  committee  is  in  conformity  with  the  laws  and  regulations  of  the 
country in which the research experiment is performed. 

Biomedical  research  involving  human  subjects  should  be  conducted  only  by 
scientifically  qualified  persons  and  under  the  supervision  of  a  clinically 
competent  medical    person.  The  responsibility  for  the  human  subject  must 
always rest with a medically qualified person and never rest on the subject of the 
research, even though the subject has given his or her consent. 

Biomedical research involving human subjects cannot legitimately be carried out 
unless the importance of the objective is in proportion to the inherent risk to the 
subject. 

Every biomedical research project involving human subjects should be preceded 
by  careful  assessment  of  predictable  risks  in  comparison  with  foreseeable 
benefits to the subject or to others. Concern for the interests of the subject must 
always prevail over the interests of science and society. 

The right of the research subject to safeguard his or her integrity must always be 
respected. Every precaution should be taken to respect the privacy of the subject 
and  to  minimize  the  impact  of  the  study  on  the  subject's  physical  and  mental 
integrity and on the personality of the subject. 

Physicians  should  abstain  from  engaging  in  research  projects  involving  human 
subjects  unless  they  are  satisfied  that  the  hazards  involved  are  believed  to  be 
predictable.  Physicians  should  cease  any  investigation  if  the  hazards  are  found 
to outweigh the potential benefits. 

In  publication  of  the  results  of  his  or  her  research,  the  physician  is  obliged  to 
preserve  the  accuracy  of  the  results.  Reports  of  experimentation  not  in 
accordance  with  the  principles  laid  down  in  this  Declaration  should  not  be 
accepted for publication. 

In  any  research  on  human  beings,  each  potential  subject  must  be  adequately 
informed of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits and potential hazards of the 
study and the discomfort it may entail. He or she should be informed that he or 
she is at liberty to abstain from participation in the study and that he or she is 
free  to  withdraw  his  or  her  consent  to  participation  at  any  time.  The  physician 
should  then  obtain  the  subject's  freely-given  informed  consent,  preferably  in 
writing. 

 
10.   When  obtaining  informed  consent  for  the  research  project  the  physician  should 
be  particularly  cautious  if  the  subject  is  in  a  dependent  relationship  to  him  or 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 
11. 

her  or  may  consent  under  duress.  In  that  case  the  informed  consent  should  be 
obtained  by  a  physician  who  is  not  engaged  in  the  investigation  and  who  is 
completely independent of this official relationship. 

In  case  of  legal  incompetence,  informed  consent  should  be  obtained  from  the 
legal guardian in accordance with national legislation. Where physical or mental 
incapacity  makes  it  impossible  to  obtain informed consent, or when the subject 
is  a minor, permission  from the responsible relative replaces that of the subject 
in accordance with national legislation. 
 
Whenever  the  minor  child  is  in  fact  able  to  give  a  consent,  the  minor's  consent 
must be obtained in addition to the consent of the minor's legal guardian. 

 
12.  The  research  protocol  should  always  contain  a  statement  of  the  ethical 
considerations involved and should indicate that the principles enunciated in the 
present Declaration are complied with. 

MEDICAL RESEARCH COMBINED WITH PROFESSIONAL CARE 
(Clinical research) 
 
l. 

In  the  treatment  of  the  sick  person,  the  physician  must  be  free  to  use  a  new 
diagnostic  and  therapeutic  measure,  if  in  his  or  her  judgement  it  offers hope of 
saving life, reestablishing health or alleviating suffering. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 

The  potential  benefits,  hazards  and  discomfort  of  a  new  method  should  be 
weighed  against  the  advantages  of  the  best  current  diagnostic  and  therapeutic 
methods. 

In  any  medical  study,  every  patient  -  including  those  of  a  control  group,  if 
any - should be assured of the best proven diagnostic and therapeutic method. 
This  does  not  exclude  the  use  of  inert  placebo  in  studies  where  no  proven 
diagnostic or therapeutic method exists. 

The refusal of the patient to participate in a study must never interfere with the 
physician-patient relationship. 

If the physician considers it essential not to obtain informed consent, the specific 
reasons  for  this  proposal  should  be  stated  in  the  experimental  protocol  for 
transmission to the independent committee (I, 2). 

The physician can combine medical research with professional care, the objective 
being  the acquisition of  new medical knowledge, only to the extent that medical 
research  is  justified  by  its  potential  diagnostic  or  therapeutic  value  for  the 
patient. 

NON-THERAPEUTIC BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS (Non-
clinical biomedical research) 
 
l. 

In  the  purely  scientific  application  of  medical  research  carried  out  on  a  human 
being, it is the duty of the physician to remain the protector of the life and health 
of that person on whom biomedical research is being carried out. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 

The subjects should be volunteers - either healthy persons or patients for whom 
the experimental design is not related to the patient's illness. 

The  investigator  or  the  investigating  team  should  discontinue  the  research  if  in 
his/her or their judgement it may, if continued, be harmful to the individual. 

11/15/04 
 

 
II. 

 
III.  

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

4. 

In  research  on  man,  the  interest  of  science  and  society  should  never  take 
precedence over considerations related to the wellbeing of the subject. 

11/15/04 
 

 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 

31 August, 1998 
 
EORTC Data Center 
Av. E. Mounier 83/11 
1200 Brussels, Belgium 
Direct phone: + 32 2 774 16 11 
Fax: + 32 2 772 35 45 

E.O.R.T.C. Gastro-Intestinal Tract Cancer Cooperative Group 

COMMITMENT STATEMENT FOR INTERGROUP TRIALS WITH US PARTICIPANTS 

Phase III Randomized Study of Adjuvant Immunotherapy with Monoclonal Antibody 17-1A versus no 
Adjuvant Therapy Following Resection for Stage II (Modified Astler Coller B2) Adenocarcinoma of the 

Colon 

EORTC 40991 (CALGB 9581) 

 

I, the undersigned declare that I will participate in study 40991. 

• 
•  Expected accrual per YEAR:  ................... 
• 

I am responsible for Ethics committee submission: 

(cid:1) YES 

 

(cid:1) NO 

If  no,  describe  hereunder  your  local  situation  and  indicate  the  person  in  charge  of  the 
submission: 

................................................................................................................................................
........... 

•  As a clinical investigator / study coordinator, I have a potential conflict of interest such 

as a professional interest, a proprietary interest or any other conflict of interest:  (cid:1) 
YES 

(cid:1) NO 

 

(If  yes,  you  will  receive  the  standard    of  conduct  for  conflict  of  interest  policy  and    a 
conflict of interest disclosure form requesting further clarification) 

•  This study is an intergroup collaboration involving US investigators and I agree to work 
according to the EORTC International Cooperative Project Assurance (ICPA) policies. I 
certify that I am authorized by my institution to make this commitment. I understand 
that  in  the  event  of  my  noncompliance  with  the  ICPA  and  with  the  EORTC  Human 
Research  Subjects  Protection  Policy,  the  EORTC  may  withdraw  my  site  from  EORTC 
registration:  

(cid:1) YES 

(cid:1) NO 

 

 

Name: 

.....................................  EORTC Institution number: .......................... 

Signature:  ........................................... 

Date: .................................. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Please complete and return this form to Mr. Praet at the EORTC Data Center 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 

 

March 2, 2000 
 
EORTC Data Center 
Av. E. Mounier 83/11 
1200 Brussels, Belgium 
Direct  phone:  +  32  2  774 
16 11 
Fax: + 32 2 772 35 45 

Template of Informed Consent Document 

This is a clinical trial.  

Clinical trials include only patients who choose to take part.  

Please take your time to make your decision. 

 

Title of the research protocol: Phase III Randomized Study of Adjuvant Immunotherapy with 
Monoclonal  Antibody  17-1A  versus  no  Adjuvant  Therapy  Following  Resection  for  Stage  II 
(Modified Astler Coller B2) Adenocarcinoma of the Colon (CALGB 9581). 

Invitation to participate in the study 

The  EORTC  Gastro-Intestinal  Tract  Cancer  Cooperative  Group  (GITCCG),  together  with 
other  research  organizations  in  Europe  and  the  US  (in  particular  the  Cancer  and 
Leukemia  Group  B  or  "CALGB"),  is  conducting  a  research  study  on  patients  that  have  a 
disease  similar  to  yours.  The  study  will  be  conducted  at  the  European  and  North-
American level under the supervision of physicians recognized as experts in this field of 
medicine.  
 
Today,  you  will  be  invited  to  take  part  to  this  research  project  after  you  are  given  full 
information about the study. The study aims to evaluate the use of a new therapy for patients 
who have had surgery for colon cancer. Taking part in this study is entirely voluntary. 
 

The standard recommended practice for treating your cancer is to perform the surgery that you 
have already undergone, with no additional treatment. Although your tumour has been removed, 
there is a risk that some tiny seeds of cancer could have broken away before surgery and spread 
to another part of your body.  We cannot tell for sure if this has happened or not in your case.  
There  is  no  evidence  that  other  treatments  for  your  disease,  in  addition  to  surgery,  offer  any 
improvement in your survival. 
 
Study Description 
Approximately  2,000  patients  will  be  asked  to  participate  in  this  study  to  evaluate  the 
effectiveness of a cancer treatment using a new investigational drug called Monoclonal Antibody 
17-1A,  or  MoAb  17-1A.    This  therapy,  and  others  like  it,  are  being  widely  studied  for  their 
potential use in treating cancer. MoAb is not like the chemotherapy drugs commonly used to treat 
cancer, because it is thought to damage cancer cells in a different way.  It helps the body’s own 
defence cells to attack and hopefully kill the cancer cells.  MoAb 17-1A may reduce the chance 
of your cancer returning in the future, although this is not known.   

 

Because it is not possible to predict whether your type of cancer will respond to this drug, only 
half of the patients in the study will receive treatment with MoAb 17-1A.  It is not clear at this 
present time whether this new treatment or standard care (i.e. no additional treatment) would be 
better  for  you.  For  this  reason,  the  treatment  plan  offered  to  you  as  part  of  the  study  will  be 
decided  by  a  method  called  randomisation.  This  means  that  your  specialist  will  call  the  study 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

office, where a computer programme will allocate a treatment to you at random.   The chances of 
your receiving either of the two treatment plans are approximately equal.  

 

You will be randomised to receive one of the two options: 
1) 

 

 

Standard care for your disease, i.e. no further treatment after surgery except for routine 
check-ups.  MoAb 17-1A is not available for general use, and can only be provided to you 
if you are allocated antibody as part of this study. 

   

2) 

Antibody  therapy,  i.e.  after  surgery,  five  antibody  treatments  with  MoAb  17-1A.  Each 
treatment will be given as a 2-hour intravenous infusion, through a needle in your arm, 
once every 28 days for approximately 5 months.  The treatment is given on an outpatient 
basis. 

 
During  your  participation  in  the  study,  you  will  undergo  routine  tests  (blood  tests  and 
scans)  to  monitor  your  progress.    If,  at  any  time  during  the  study,  your  cancer  should 
return,  both  you  and  your  doctor  will  be  able  to  discuss  further  treatment  for  your 
disease. As part of this trial, your doctor will follow your progress long-term.  
 

 

 

As part of the study, special tests will be performed on tissue, body fluids, or other specimens 
that  were  obtained  from  you  in  the  normal  course  of  your treatment and care.  These research 
tests may be developed during the time you are having treatment or in the future.  We ask that 
you give your approval for these tests to be done, as they may provide additional information that 
will  help  us  to  understand  your  disease  better  and  how  patients  respond  to  treatment.  Tissue, 
body  fluids  or  specimens  obtained  from  you  may  be  used  to  develop  products  that  could  be 
patented or licensed.  There are no plans to provide financial compensation should this occur. 
 
Side Effects 
As with all treatments there may be some side effects.  The most common side effects of 17-1A 
are  nausea,  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  abdominal  pain,  flatulence and loss of appetite.  Patients  may 
develop a rash or hives, particularly on the hands and feet, or may experience severe itching.  If 
needed, medication can be prescribed before and during treatment to help with these side effects, 
all  of  which  are  reversible  once  treatment  is  stopped.  Flu-like  symptoms,  fatigue,  fever, 
headaches,  or  pain  the  joints  usually  go  away  by  themselves  about  a  week  after  they  began.  
Medication  may  be  prescribed  to  prevent  or  control  aches,  fever  or  chills.    Patients  may 
experience back or chest pain. 

 

Patients may develop an allergic reaction to the study drug (9 people out of every 1000 treated).  
A fast or slow heart rate, wheezing, low or high blood pressure, sweating, fever, and swelling of 
the  face,  mouth  and  tongue  may  occur  within  a  few  minutes  of  treatment.  These  reactions  are 
rarely severe or fatal and have generally been controlled with adrenalin.  The study drug will not 
be given again if you suffer an allergic reaction during the study, and your disease will be treated 
in  the  usual  way.    You  will  be  observed  closely  while  the  drug  is  given,  and  medication  for 
controlling an allergic reaction will be immediately available. 

 

There  have  been  rare  instances  of  patients  developing  the  following  while  on  MoAb  17-1A: 
bradycardia  (slow  heart  rate);  tachycardia  (fast  heart  rate);  hypotension  (low  blood  pressure); 
hypertension  (high  blood  pressure);  cerebral  infarction  (a  condition  similar  to  a  stroke); 
neutropenia (reduction in the white cells that fight infection, which may lead to an increased risk 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

of infection); hair loss; colitis (inflammation of the colon); myositis (inflammation of a muscle); 
conjunctivitis  (inflammation  of  the  outside  surface  of  the  eye);  nephrotic  syndrome  (kidney 
dysfunction  characterised  by  the  loss  of  protein  in  the  urine);  hypercalcaemia  (an  excess  of 
calcium in the blood); chromatoplasia (abnormally coloured vision); and deafness. 

 

 

As  with  any  medication,  unanticipated  side  effects  can  occur  which  have  not  been  reported.  
Please  report  all  symptoms  you  experience  to  your  doctor  immediately.  In  the  event  that 
complications  occur  as  a  result  of  taking  part  in  this  study,  you  will  be  provided  with  the 
necessary care.  If health conditions occur which could adversely affect your treatment or your 
health, your doctor may discontinue treatment. 
Patient Protection and Confidentiality 
You  may  not  gain  any  benefit  from  taking  part  in  this  study,  but  information  collected 
from your participation may benefit other patients with colon cancer in the future. If any 
new  information  becomes  available  during  the  study,  which  may  affect  your  decision  to 
participate,  this  will  be  discussed  with  you.  Any  significant  new  findings  that  relate  to 
your treatment will be discussed with you. Taking part in this study is entirely voluntary 
and you may withdraw at any time without affecting your future care.  
You  may  contact  either  the  investigator  in  charge  or  a  member  of  the  Independent  Ethics 
Committee  of  ___________________  Hospital  whose names and phone numbers  are listed  at the 
end  of  this  form  if,  at  any  point  during  the  duration  of  this  treatment,  you feel that you have 
been: 
a. inadequately informed of the risks, benefits, or alternative treatments, or 
b. encouraged to continue in this study beyond your wish to do so. 
 

Circumstances Under Which Your Participation May Be Terminated 
Without Your Consent: If health conditions occur which would make 
your participation possibly dangerous, or if other conditions  occur that 
would  make participation detrimental to you or your health, then your 

doctor may discontinue this treatment. 

 
The  trial  involves  the  collection  of  information  contained  in  your  medical  records  and 
which relate to your disease. A record of your progress will be kept in a confidential file 
at  your  hospital  and  at  the  study  office.  It  is  very  important  that  the  information 
collected  is  accurate  and  from  time  to  time  it  may  be  checked  against  your  medical 
records.  Duly  authorized  persons  (EORTC,  CALGB,  NCI  and  FDA  staff;  national  and/or 
foreign health authority representatives, including U.S. governmental agencies; or certain 
persons  from  the  company  supplying  the  trial  medication)  may  have  access  to  your 
medical records. 
Insurance has been taken by the EORTC according to the current legislation. Everything 
has  been  done  and  will  continue  to  be  done  to  prevent  additional  health  problems 
occurring as a result of your taking part in this trial. 
This  research  protocol  has  been  submitted  to  an  ethics  committee  which  mission  is  to 
verify  that  all  conditions  for  your  safety  and  respect  of  your  rights  are  respected. 
Approval  to  this  research  has  been  given  by  the  Ethics  Committee  of  ______________  on 
________________ 

Your medical records, specimens and any data collected as part of the study will be treated in the 
strictest confidence.  Every effort will be made to maintain your confidentiality and if the results 
of the study are published, your identity will remain confidential. 

 

11/15/04 
 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

There  are  no  special  arrangements  for  compensation  for  this  study.    In  the  event  that 
complications occur as a result of this treatment, you will be provided with the necessary care, 
but you will not automatically receive compensation.  
 
If you do decide to take part in the study, you will be asked to sign a consent form to show that 
you have understood what the study involves. Please do not hesitate to discuss any questions that 
you may have with your doctor.  
 
Contact Person 

In  case  of  any  problem  or  question,  your  doctor  will  be  pleased  to  answer  any  further 
questions and may be contacted as follows: 

Name of the doctor: ..................................................................................................... 

Hospital: ..................................................................................................... 

Telephone: ..................................................................................................... 

If you consent to join this trial, you will be given a telephone number at the hospital that 
you  can  contact  at  any  time  if  you  feel  unwell  or  have  further  questions.  Your  family 
doctor  will  also  be  told  about  your  taking  part  in  this  trial  and  what  is  involved,  if  you 
agree.  

Please  take  your  time  to  consider  this  information  and  do  not  hesitate  to  ask  further 
questions of your doctor if anything is not clear. You are entitled to keep a copy of this 
document after you and your doctor have signed it. 

Acceptance of participation 

Title of the research protocol: Phase  III  Randomized  Study  of  Adjuvant  Immunotherapy  with 
Monoclonal  Antibody  17-1A  versus  no  Adjuvant  Therapy  Following  Resection  for  Stage  II 
(Modified Astler Coller B2) Adenocarcinoma of the Colon (CALGB 9581). 

(cid:2) I have been properly informed of the clinical research that is being proposed to me 

(cid:2) I received a copy of the information sheet 

(cid:2) All my rights have been clearly explained 

(cid:2) I have received a copy of the informed consent document 

(cid:2) "I accept to participate in the research entitled Phase III Randomized Study of Adjuvant 
Immunotherapy  with  Monoclonal  Antibody  17-1A  versus  no  Adjuvant  Therapy  Following 
Resection  for  Stage  II  (Modified  Astler  Coller  B2)  Adenocarcinoma  of  the  Colon  and 
registered  under  number  40991.  My  participation  is  completely  voluntary  and  I 
have the possibility to withdraw my consent at any time without explanation. This 
will  not  affect  my  relationship  with  my  treating  physician.  The  data  collected  on 
my  behalf  will  be  strictly  confidential  and  treated  according  to  the  "Directive  on 
Human  Protection  "  and  the  local  applicable  laws.  My  consent  does  not  discharge 
the  organizers  of  the  research  from  their  responsibilities  and  I  keep  all  my  rights 
guaranteed by the law". 

11/15/04 
 

________________________________ 
(Patients's signature) 

________________________________ 
(Physician's signature) 

________________________________ 
(Witness's signature) 

________________________________ 
(Name of Responsible Investigator) 

 

________________________________ 
(Name of IRB Representative) 

 

CALGB 9581 

APPENDIX IX 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

_____________________ 
(Date) 

_____________________ 
(Date) 

_____________________ 
(Date) 

_____________________ 
(Telephone) 

_____________________ 
(Telephone) 

 

11/15/04 
 

